Earthquakes are caused by movements within the Earth's crust and uppermost mantle. They range from weak events detectable only by seismometers, to sudden and violent events lasting many minutes which have caused some of the greatest disasters in human history. Below, earthquakes are listed by period, region or country, year, magnitude, cost, fatalities, and number of scientific studies.

Deadliest earthquakes
The following is a summary list of earthquakes with over approximately 100,000 deaths. The 893 Ardabil earthquake is most likely the same as the 893 Dvin earthquake, due to misreading of the Arabic word for Dvin, "Dabil" as "Ardabil".

Deadliest earthquakes by year since 1920
Strongest earthquakes by magnitude
For those which occurred before the development and deployment of seismographs – starting around 1900 – magnitudes are estimated from historical reports of the extent and severity of damage.

Pre-instrumental earthquakes
Strongest earthquakes by magnitude each year since 1907
Strongest earthquakes by magnitude by country/territory
This list is a work in progress. Information is likely to be changed.
The list refers to current country boundaries rather than those at the date of the earthquake.
Please note, multiple countries could have the same earthquake listed, such as the 1906 Ecuador–Colombia earthquake being listed for both Ecuador and Colombia.
Unless otherwise noted, magnitudes are reported on the Moment magnitude scale (Mw).

Earthquakes with the most property damage
This is the top ten major earthquakes by the US dollar value of property (public and private) losses directly attributable to the earthquake.

Most studied earthquakes
The 50 most studied earthquakes according to the International Seismological Centre (ISC), based on a count of scientific papers (mostly in English) that discuss that earthquake. The "Event #" is linked to the ISC Event Bibliography for that event.

Modified from figure 2, "The most studied events", at the ISC's Overview of the ISC Event Bibliography.
International Seismological Centre. Event Bibliography. Thatcham, United Kingdom.  2018.

Lists by time period
By century
Before 1900
1901–2000
2001–present

By decade
2001–2010
2011–2020
2021–present

By year
Lists by location
By country
By region
British Isles
Caribbean
Levant
South Asia

See also
List of deadly earthquakes since 1900
List of historical earthquakes
List of megathrust earthquakes
List of natural disasters by death toll

References
External links

USGS-ANSS Latest earthquakes around the world
Southern California Earthquake Center (SCEC)
IRIS Seismic Monitor, Recent earthquakes around the world
SeismoArchives, Seismogram Archives of Significant Earthquakes of the World
Recent New Zealand earthquakes
Database for the damage of world earthquake, ancient period (3000 BC) to year of 2006—Building Research Institute (Japan)
20 Largest Earthquakes in the World Since 1900, USGS
Historic Worldwide Earthquakes, magnitude 6.0 and greater, sorted by magnitude, USGS (archived 2009)