The 1984–85 NHL season was the 68th season of the National Hockey League. The Edmonton Oilers won their second straight Stanley Cup by beating the Philadelphia Flyers four games to one in the final series.

League business
Entry draft
The 1984 NHL entry draft was held on June 9, at the Montreal Forum in Montreal, Quebec. Mario Lemieux was selected first overall by the Pittsburgh Penguins.

Ice officials begin wearing helmets
Referee Andy Van Hellemond becomes the first on ice official in league history to wear a helmet. Soon, several officials would follow his lead and wear helmets before it became mandatory for all officials for the 2006–07 season.

Regular season
The Philadelphia Flyers had the best record in the NHL, four points ahead of second place Edmonton Oilers. Flyers goaltender Pelle Lindbergh went on to become the first European to win the Vezina Trophy. Oilers' star Wayne Gretzky once again won the Art Ross Trophy by reaching the 200 point plateau for the third time in four years. He also set a new record for assists in a season with 135 and won his sixth straight Hart Memorial Trophy. Mario Lemieux made his NHL debut by scoring 100 points and winning the Calder Trophy for rookie of the year. On October 26, 1984, Paul Coffey of the Edmonton Oilers would be the last defenceman in the 20th century to score four goals in one game. It occurred in a game versus the Detroit Red Wings.
The last two players active in the 1960s, Butch Goring and Brad Park, retired after the playoffs. Goring was the last active, playing his last playoff game three days after Park's last game.

Final standings
Note: W = Wins, L = Losses, T = Ties, GF= Goals For, GA = Goals Against, Pts = Points, PIM = Penalties in minutes. Teams qualifying for the playoffs shown in bold.

Prince of Wales Conference
Clarence Campbell Conference
Playoffs
Bracket
The top four teams in each division qualified for the playoffs. In the division semifinals, the fourth seeded team in each division played against the division winner from their division. The other series matched the second and third place teams from the divisions. The two winning teams from each division's semifinals then met in the division finals. The two division winners of each conference then played in the conference finals. The two conference winners then advanced to the Stanley Cup Finals.
In the division semifinals, teams competed in a best-of-five series. In the other three rounds, teams competed in a best-of-seven series (scores in the bracket indicate the number of games won in each series).

Awards
Hart Memorial Trophy voting
James Norris Memorial Trophy voting
Jack Adams Award voting
Vezina Trophy voting
All-Star teams
Player statistics
Scoring leaders
Note: GP = Games played; G = Goals; A = Assists; Pts = Points

Source: NHL.

Leading goaltenders
Note: GP = Games played; W = Won; L = Lost; T = Tied; GA = Goals allowed; GAA = Goals against average; SO = Shutouts; SV% = Save percentage

Coaches
Patrick Division
New Jersey Devils: Doug Carpenter
New York Islanders: Al Arbour
New York Rangers: Herb Brooks and Craig Patrick
Philadelphia Flyers: Mike Keenan
Pittsburgh Penguins: Bob Berry
Washington Capitals: Bryan Murray

Adams Division
Boston Bruins: Gerry Cheevers and Harry Sinden
Buffalo Sabres: Scotty Bowman
Hartford Whalers: Jack Evans
Montreal Canadiens: Jacques Lemaire
Quebec Nordiques: Michel Bergeron

Norris Division
Chicago Black Hawks: Orval Tessier and Bob Pulford
Detroit Red Wings: Nick Polano
Minnesota North Stars: Glen Sonmor
St. Louis Blues: Jacques Demers
Toronto Maple Leafs: Dan Maloney

Smythe Division
Calgary Flames: Bob Johnson
Edmonton Oilers: Glen Sather
Los Angeles Kings: Pat Quinn
Vancouver Canucks: Bill LaForge and Harry Neale
Winnipeg Jets: Barry Long

Milestones
Debuts
The following is a list of players of note who played their first NHL game in 1984–85 (listed with their first team, asterisk(*) marks debut in playoffs):

Gino Cavallini, Calgary Flames
Joel Otto, Calgary Flames
Ed Olczyk, Chicago Black Hawks
Marc Bergevin, Chicago Black Hawks
Gerard Gallant, Detroit Red Wings
Esa Tikkanen*, Edmonton Oilers
Steve Smith, Edmonton Oilers
Kevin Dineen, Hartford Whalers
Ray Ferraro, Hartford Whalers
Sylvain Cote, Hartford Whalers
Ulf Samuelsson, Hartford Whalers
Garry Galley, Los Angeles Kings
Patrick Roy, Montreal Canadiens
Petr Svoboda, Montreal Canadiens
Stephane Richer, Montreal Canadiens
Greg Adams, New Jersey Devils
Kirk Muller, New Jersey Devils
Dave Gagner, New York Rangers
Grant Ledyard, New York Rangers
Kelly Miller, New York Rangers
Tomas Sandstrom, New York Rangers
Rick Tocchet, Philadelphia Flyers
Doug Bodger, Pittsburgh Penguins
Mario Lemieux, Pittsburgh Penguins
Steve Thomas, Toronto Maple Leafs
Todd Gill, Toronto Maple Leafs
Al Iafrate, Toronto Maple Leafs
Petri Skriko, Vancouver Canucks
Kevin Hatcher, Washington Capitals
Dave Ellett, Winnipeg Jets

Last games
The following is a list of players of note that played their last game in the NHL in 1984–85 (listed with their last team):

Terry O'Reilly, Boston Bruins
Butch Goring, Boston Bruins
Craig Ramsay, Buffalo Sabres
Jerry Korab, Buffalo Sabres
Jim Schoenfeld, Buffalo Sabres
Real Cloutier, Buffalo Sabres
Bob MacMillan, Chicago Black Hawks
Brad Park, Detroit Red Wings
Colin Campbell, Detroit Red Wings
Darryl Sittler, Detroit Red Wings
Ivan Boldirev, Detroit Red Wings
Steve Shutt, Los Angeles Kings
Paul Holmgren, Minnesota North Stars
Pierre Mondou, Montreal Canadiens
Anders Hedberg, New York Rangers
Robbie Ftorek, New York Rangers
Rick Kehoe, Pittsburgh Penguins
John Garrett, Vancouver Canucks
Note: Goring and Park were the last two players to have played in the NHL in the 1960s.

Broadcasting
This was the first season in more than a decade that CBC was not the lone Canadian national broadcaster. While Molson continued to present Hockey Night in Canada on Saturday nights, rival brewery Carling O'Keefe began airing Friday night games on CTV. The two networks also split the playoffs and finals. CTV had previously aired HNIC-produced telecasts in the 1960s.
This was the third and final season of the league's U.S. national broadcast rights deal with USA, covering a slate of regular season games and selected playoff games. ESPN then signed a three-year agreement with the league after bidding about twice as much as USA had been paying. USA would not televise the NHL again until after the network was acquired by NBCUniversal in the early 2000s, airing selected playoff games as part of NBC Sports' overall NHL coverage between 2015 and 2021.

See also
List of Stanley Cup champions
1984 NHL entry draft
1984–85 NHL transactions
37th National Hockey League All-Star Game
National Hockey League All-Star Game
NHL All-Rookie Team
1984 Canada Cup
1984 in sports
1985 in sports

References
Diamond, Dan, ed. (2008). Total Stanley Cup 2008. NHL.
Dinger, Ralph, ed. (2011). The National Hockey League Official Guide & Record Book 2012. Toronto, ON: Dan Diamond & Associates. ISBN 978-1-894801-22-5.
Dryden, Steve, ed. (2000). Century of hockey. Toronto, ON: McClelland & Stewart Ltd. ISBN 0-7710-4179-9.
Fischler, Stan; Fischler, Shirley; Hughes, Morgan; Romain, Joseph; Duplacey, James (2003). The Hockey Chronicle: Year-by-Year History of the National Hockey League. Lincolnwood, Illinois: Publications International Inc. ISBN 0-7853-9624-1.
Notes

External links
Hockey Database
NHL.com
Oiler playoff highlights
Diamond, Dan, ed. (2008). Total Stanley Cup 2008. NHL.