This article is a List of awards and nominations received by Nathan Lane.
Nathan Lane is an American actor and comedian known for his roles on stage and screen. He has received several awards including three Tony Awards, seven Drama Desk Awards, which includes the Hal Prince Lifetime Achievement Award, three Emmy Awards, and a Screen Actors Guild Awards as well as nominations for two Golden Globe Awards.
Lane has received six Tony Award nominations receiving three wins for his performances as Pseudolus in the Stephen Sondheim musical comedy A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Forum (1996), Max Bialystock in the Mel Brooks satirical musical The Producers (2001), and Roy Cohn in Tony Kushner epic play Angels in America (2018). Lane has received eleven Drama Desk Award nominations receiving seven wins, which includes the Harold S. Prince Award for Lifetime Achievement, as well as two Obies, the Lucille Lortel Award and six Outer Critics Circle Awards. He also won the Laurence Olivier Award his performance on the West End stage in The Producers in London.
For his film work he has received two Golden Globe Award nominations for his performances in Mike Nichols' The Birdcage (1996) and the film adaptation of the Mel Brooks Broadway musical The Producers.He received one Screen Actors Guild Award winning for Outstanding Ensemble for The Birdcage (1996) and the National Board of Review Award, also winning for Outstanding Ensemble for Nicholas Nickleby.
Lane has also received various awards for his work on television including a Primetime Emmy Award, and a record breaking eight nominations in the guest actor category. He won the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series for playing Teddy Dimas	in the Hulu mystery-comedy series Only Murders in the Building in 2022. He was Emmy-nominated for playing a thief in Frasier (1995), a former lover in Mad About You (1998), and Pepper Saltzman in Modern Family (2011-2014). He also received two Daytime Emmy Awards for voicing Timon in Timon & Pumbaa (1996) and Spot Helperman / Scott Leadready II in Teacher's Pet (2001).

Major associations
Emmy Awards
Golden Globe Award
Screen Actors Guild Award
Olivier Awards
Tony Awards
Theatre awards
Miscellaneous awards
Honorary awards


== References ==