The United States federal executive departments are the principal units of the executive branch of the federal government of the United States. The executive departments are the administrative arms of the president of the United States. They are analogous to ministries common in parliamentary or semi-presidential systems but (the United States being a presidential system) they  are led by a head of government who is also the head of state. There are currently 15 executive departments.

Overview
Structure
Each department is headed by a secretary whose title echoes the title of their respective department, with the exception of the Department of Justice, whose head is known as the attorney general. The heads of the executive departments are appointed by the president and take office after confirmation by the United States Senate, and serve at the pleasure of the president. The heads of departments are members of the Cabinet of the United States, an executive organ that normally acts as an advisory body to the president. In the Opinion Clause (Article II, section 2, clause 1) of the U.S. Constitution, heads of executive departments are referred to as "principal Officer in each of the executive Departments".
The heads of executive departments are included in the line of succession to the president, in the event of a vacancy in the presidency, after the vice president, the speaker of the House, and the president pro tempore of the Senate. They are included in order of their respective department's formation, with the exception of the secretary of defense, whose position in the line of succession is based on when the Department of War was formed.

Separation of powers
To enforce a strong separation of powers, the federal Constitution's Ineligibility Clause expressly prohibits executive branch employees (including heads of executive departments) from simultaneously serving in Congress, and vice versa. Accordingly, in sharp contrast to parliamentary systems where ministers are often selected to form a government from members of parliament, U.S. legislators who are appointed by the president and confirmed by the Senate to serve as heads of executive departments must resign from Congress before assuming their new positions. If the emoluments for a new appointee's executive branch position were increased while the appointee was previously serving in Congress (e.g., cost of living adjustments), the president must implement a Saxbe fix.

Contracting and grantmaking roles
The chart below shows that several executive departments (Education, Health and Human Services, Housing and Urban Development, and Transportation) have disproportionately small employee headcounts in contrast to the size of their budgets. This is because many of their employees merely supervise contracts with private independent contractors or grants (especially categorical grants) to state or local government agencies who are primarily responsible for providing services directly to the general public. In the 20th century, when the federal government began to provide funding and supervision for matters which were historically seen as the domain of state governments (i.e., education, health and welfare services, housing, and transportation), Congress frequently authorized only funding for grants which were voluntary, in the sense that state or local government agencies could choose to apply for such grants (and accept conditions attached by Congress) or they could decline to apply. In the case of HHS's Medicare program, Congress chose to contract with private health insurers because they "already possessed the requisite expertise for administering complex health insurance programs", and because American hospitals preferred to continue dealing with private insurers instead of a new federal bureaucracy.

Current departments
Former departments
Proposed departments
Department of Industry and Commerce, proposed by Secretary of the Treasury William Windom in a speech given at a Chamber of Commerce dinner in May 1881
Department of Natural Resources, proposed by the Eisenhower administration, President Richard Nixon, the 1976 GOP national platform, and by Bill Daley (as a consolidation of the Departments of the Interior and Energy, and the Environmental Protection Agency)
Department of Peace, proposed by Founding Father and signer of the United States Declaration of Independence, Benjamin Rush in 1793, Senator Matthew Neely in the 1930s, Congressman Dennis Kucinich in the 2000s, and other members of the U.S. Congress
Department of Social Welfare, proposed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt in January 1937
Department of Public Works, proposed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt in January 1937
Department of Conservation (a renameing of the Department of the Interior), proposed by President Franklin D. Roosevelt in January 1937
Department of Urban Affairs and Housing, proposed by President John F. Kennedy
Department of Business and Labor, proposed by President Lyndon B. Johnson
Department of Community Development, proposed by President Richard Nixon; to be chiefly concerned with rural infrastructure development
Department of Human Resources, proposed by President Richard Nixon; essentially a revised Department of Health, Education, and Welfare
Department of Economic Affairs, proposed by President Richard Nixon; essentially a consolidation of the Departments of Commerce, Labor, and Agriculture.
Department of Environmental Protection, proposed by Senator Arlen Specter and others
Department of Intelligence, proposed by former director of national intelligence Mike McConnell
Department of Global Development, proposed by the Center for Global Development
Department of Art, proposed by Quincy Jones
Department of Business, proposed by President Barack Obama as a consolidation of the U.S. Department of Commerce's core business and trade functions, the Small Business Administration, the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative, the Export-Import Bank, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, and the U.S. Trade and Development Agency
Department of Commerce and the Workforce, a merger of the Department of Commerce and the Department of Labor proposed in 2011 and 2013 by Senator Richard Burr (R-NC) in S. 1116
Department of Education and the Workforce, proposed by President Donald Trump as a consolidation of the Departments of Education and Labor
Department of Health and Public Welfare, proposed by President Donald Trump as a renamed Department of Health and Human Services
Department of Economic Development, proposed by Senator Elizabeth Warren to replace the Commerce Department, subsume other agencies like the Small Business Administration and the Patent and Trademark Office, and include research and development programs, worker training programs, and export and trade authorities like the Office of the U.S. Trade Representative with the single goal of creating and defending good American jobs
Department of Technology, proposed by businessman and 2020 Democratic presidential candidate Andrew Yang
Department of Culture, patterned on similar departments in many foreign nations, proposed by, among others, Murray Moss and Jeva Lange

See also
British government departments
Canadian Federal government departments
Cabinet of the Confederate States of America
Cabinet of the United States
Independent agencies of the United States government
List of federal agencies in the United States

References
Citations
Sources
External links
 Media related to Executive Departments of the United States at Wikimedia Commons