Bad Boys is a 1995 American action comedy film, directed by Michael Bay in his feature directorial debut, and produced by Don Simpson and Jerry Bruckheimer. The film stars Martin Lawrence and Will Smith as Marcus Burnett and Mike Lowrey, two Miami narcotics detectives who are investigating $100 million worth of stolen packs of heroin and must also protect a woman from a drug dealer after she witnessed a key murder.
The film was released on April 7, 1995, by Columbia Pictures. It received mixed reviews from critics, and was commercially successful, grossing $141 million, and spawning three sequels: Bad Boys II (2003), Bad Boys for Life (2020), and Bad Boys: Ride or Die (2024).

Plot
Lifelong friends Mike Lowrey and Marcus Burnett are devoted Miami Police narcotics detectives investigating $100 million of seized Mafia heroin, their biggest career bust which was stolen from a secure police vault. Internal Affairs suspects that it was an inside job and threatens to shut down the entire department unless they recover the drugs within 72 hours.
Mike asks one of his informants and ex-girlfriend Maxine "Max" Logan to look for people who are newly rich and therefore suspects. She gets herself and her best friend Julie Mott hired as escorts by Eddie Dominguez, a crooked former cop.
The party is soon interrupted by Dominguez's French drug kingpin boss Fouchet and his henchmen Casper, Ferguson, and Noah (who informed Fouchet of Eddie’s wrecklessness). Fouchet, knowing that Max has seen too much, distracts her by asking her to model for him, he then shoots and kills her, he also shoots Eddie in the leg, knowing he’s a liability, and has his henchman kill Eddie. While this is going on, Julie hides in the bathroom and manages to escape. The madam who hired Julie and Max is disposed of by Noah, who then knocks out Mike as he investigates Max's death.
Frantically calling the police, Julie insists on talking only to Mike, who is following up on a lead with the Madam. Knowing she never met Mike, captain Conrad Howard forces Marcus to impersonate him to talk to her. At her apartment, Marcus and Julie are attacked by some of Fouchet's henchmen, one of whom Marcus kills.
While he rendezvous with Mike at the precinct the next morning, Captain Howard forces Marcus and Mike to impersonate each other, with Mike living at the Burnett residence while Marcus stays with Julie at Mike's. They struggle to keep up the charade in Julie's presence, and she soon begins to suspect the truth.
Looking through mugshots, Julie identifies Noah as one of the henchmen. The partners go to Club Hell, one of Noah's known hangouts, and she follows unbeknownst to them. After being spotted, Marcus knocks Casper unconscious during a bathroom fight. Julie tries to kill Fouchet, but Marcus stops her.
In the ensuing car chase, Mike kills Noah. The three manage to get away, but are caught on camera by a news helicopter. The ensuing report is later seen by Marcus's family, who were told that he was temporarily reassigned to Cleveland.
Mike and Marcus meet their old informant Jojo and learn about the location of the chemist who is cutting the stolen drugs. The three return to Mike's apartment, where Marcus's wife Theresa confronts them and confirms Julie's suspicion they have been impersonating each other. Fouchet and his gang show up and kidnap Julie.
Mike and Marcus's department is shut down by Internal Affairs. Despite being reassigned, Howard delays the order, giving Mike and Marcus more time to solve the case. They access Dominguez's private police database profile and learn that the police secretary Francine is his former girlfriend. She was being blackmailed by Fouchet and Dominguez after they took nude photos of her, threatening to post them at her kids' school.
Mike, Marcus, and detectives Sanchez and Ruiz, head to the Miami-Opa Locka Executive Airport. During a fierce shootout, they kill Fouchet's remaining henchmen, including Casper and Ferguson, and rescue Julie. They chase a fleeing Fouchet and force his car into a concrete barrier. As he tries to flee, Mike pulls his sidearm on him and commands him to freeze while Marcus tells Mike that Fouchet is not worth killing. Mike instead shoots him in the leg and closes in on him, kicks his gun away, then pauses before attempting to arrest him at gunpoint.
As Fouchet tries to bait Mike into shooting him, Marcus pulls him back and makes him holster his weapon. Fouchet surreptitiously draws a gun but is shot to death by Mike after seeing the sunlight reflection off Fouchet's gun flash across Marcus' face before he can kill Marcus, avenging Max's death. An exhausted Marcus leaves Julie with Mike handcuffing them to each other and heads home, eager to get his quality time with his wife.

Cast
Development
In the film's early stages of development, Simpson and Bruckheimer initially envisioned Dana Carvey and Jon Lovitz in the roles.  When the film was written for Carvey and Lovitz, the original title for Bad Boys was Bulletproof Hearts. The film was initially set up at Hollywood Pictures, a Walt Disney Studios subsidiary, but it was placed into turnaround by management and sold the project to Columbia Pictures. Arsenio Hall turned down the role of Lowrey and claims that choice as the worst mistake he has ever made. The role eventually went to Smith.

Production
Principal photography began on June 27, 1994, at the Dade Tire company near downtown Miami, the city chosen to replace the original New York locale. Filming continued throughout the area, including South Beach's Tides Hotel, the Mediterranean Biltmore Hotel, the Dade County Courthouse and a multimillion-dollar estate on a private island. The second floor of downtown Miami's Alfred DuPont building was converted into a police station; a freighter on the Miami River into a drug lab. Bad Boys' climactic scenes were filmed at the Opa-Locka Airport. Both Lawrence and Smith were starring in their own hit television shows, Martin and The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air, when filming Bad Boys; filming was quick due to the television schedules of the stars with production wrapping on August 31. The opening sequence was written and shot during post-production.

Improvisation
Director Bay did not like the script and often engaged Smith and Lawrence in discussions about how the dialogue and scenes could improve. He often allowed them to improvise while the cameras were rolling. He secretly told Smith to call Lawrence a bitch before the car scene. The line "two bitches in the sea" was improvised, as was Lawrence's comment when Leoni called him gay. The scene in the convenience store, when the clerk puts a gun to Burnett and Lowrey's heads and yells, telling them to "Freeze, mother bitches!", is also improvised. They came up with: "No, you freeze, bitch! Now back up, put the gun down and get me a pack of Tropical Fruit Bubbalicious". "And some Skittles." According to Bay in the DVD commentary, at the end of the film when Mike and Marcus are recuperating, Mike says "I love you, man." Bay claims that Smith refused to say the line, causing the director and actor to argue back and forth over the line. Bay wanted Smith to say the line as he felt it summed up the friendship between the cops. After their argument had lasted for half of the day's shoot and much of the crew was ready to pack up, a fed up Bay told Smith to do whatever he wanted, after which Smith changed his mind and agreed to say the line.

Music
Reception
Box office
Bad Boys generated a total of $15.5 million during its opening weekend, beating out A Goofy Movie and Tommy Boy to reach the number one spot. For its second weekend, it remained at the top spot with $11 million. Despite being dethroned by While You Were Sleeping, the film still made $7 million in its third weekend, while also outgrossing Kiss of Death. Bad Boys was commercially successful, grossing $141,407,024 worldwide — $65,807,024 in North America and $75,600,000 internationally.

Critical reception
On Rotten Tomatoes,  Bad Boys holds an approval rating of 44% based on 70 reviews, with an average rating of 5.3/10. The site's critical consensus reads: "Bad Boys stars Will Smith and Martin Lawrence have enjoyable chemistry; unfortunately, director Michael Bay too often drowns it out with set pieces and explosions in place of an actual story." On Metacritic, the film has a weighted average score of 41 out of 100, based on 24 critics, indicating "mixed or average" reviews. Audiences polled by CinemaScore gave the film an average grade of "A" on an A+ to F scale.
Most of the criticisms focused on the fact that despite the production of the film and the ability of the stars, the script did not diverge from the generic plot of a buddy-cop genre film, instead opting for repeated use of formulaic scenes.
Roger Ebert in his video review of the film on At the Movies noted that despite the highly energetic approach of the two lead actors and the visual style of the film, their acting talents were mostly "new wine in old bottles". He illustrated that many of the elements featured in the film including both the plot and characters had been recycled from other films, particularly those from the Lethal Weapon and Beverly Hills Cop series—recurrent stock-characters, police detective clichés and over-long action scenes. In describing the archetypal cop-buddy genre action scene adhered to by the film, Ebert noted "Whenever a movie like this starts to drag, there's always one infallible solution; have a car-chase and then blow something up real good." Ebert gave the film 2 out of 4 stars.
Gene Siskel in his appraisal of the film said that he had lost interest in the film after its introduction due to the very formulaic approach, and repeated Roger Ebert's criticism that the talents of the lead actors were wasted; suggesting that the production company did not spend significant time producing a script which would be suitable for their talents. Siskel gave the film 2 out of 4.

Home media
Bad Boys was released on VHS and LaserDisc on November 7, 1995. It would then premiere DVD on June 27, 2000. A UMD was released on December 20, 2005. A Blu-ray release followed on June 1, 2010. Bad Boys was released in a two movie pack that includes its successor Bad Boys II on Ultra HD Blu-ray on September 4, 2018.

See also
Bad Boys (franchise)
Bade Miyan Chote Miyan (1998), an Indian film inspired from Bad boys.

References
External links

Bad Boys at IMDb
Bad Boys at the TCM Movie Database
Bad Boys at the AFI Catalog of Feature Films