Tenkodogo is a town in southeastern Burkina Faso. It serves as the capital city of Boulgou Province and the Centre-Est Region of Burkina Faso with a population of 61,936 (2019). Tenkodogo was also the capital of the historic Tenkodogo Bissa-Mossi origin and considered to be root of all other Mossi Kingdoms, having been founded circa 1100. The literal translation of Tenkodogo is ancient-land.

Economy
The villages surrounding Tenkodogo are primarily based around animal husbandry.
The main market takes place every 3 days.
Notable hotels include Hotel Djamou, Hotel Djamou Annexe, Hotel Laafi, and Auberge Riale.

Politics
On 29 January 2016, the king of Tenkodogo, Naba Saga, died while in Thailand for hospital care. He was the 28th king of Tenkodogo according to tradition and was inducted on 5 October 2001. He had taken the position after the death of his father, Naba Tigre, in September 2001. He was succeeded by Naba Guiguem-Pollé as king.

Transport
The town is connected to Koupéla and Bittou, along the N15 highway.
Companies such as STAF, TSF, TSR, TCV and many more provide multiple daily services to Ouagadougou.
Tenkodogo is approximately 185 kilometres (115 mi) from Ouagadougou and it takes about 3h30min by vehicle.

Development
In the period leading up to the 2019 edition of 11 Dècembre festivity, Tenkodogo had a massive improvement to its road network. Multiple roads and roundabouts were asphalted making movements within the city much faster.
Tenkodogo also had the removal of its dirt runway to make way for the 11 Dècembre neighbourhood (colloquially known as "Cité 11 Decémbre") which is full of modern villas and houses.

Royal Family
The headquarters of the royal family is located within the Palais Royal de Tenkodogo (colloquially known as Na-Yiri in Mooré language) located at a close proximity to the market (Marchè de Tenkodogo or Tenkodogo Daassi or Raaga in both BISSA and Mooré languages respectively).The second in command of the Tenkodogo chieftaincy or prime minister is Kere family. 
The current head of the family is His Majesty King Naba Guiguem-Pollé and Kiir BIDIMPOO as his second in command, King of the Kingdom of Tenkodogo and Rima of BISSAKO (RIALEKOU).
The majority of descendants of the royal family carry the surname Sorgho and they are colloquially known as the naabisi (royals) of the city.
The royal family are still a key figure in the city and they still mediate over land or family disputes in the city.

Climate
Köppen-Geiger climate classification system classifies its climate as hot semi-arid (BSh) that closely borders with tropical wet and dry (Aw).

Demographics
See also
List of cities in Burkina Faso

References
External links
 Media related to Tenkodogo at Wikimedia Commons