The 2021–22 Eredivisie was the 66th season of Eredivisie, the premier football competition in the Netherlands. It began on 14 August 2021 and concluded on 15 May 2022.

Teams
Cambuur (promoted after a five-year absence), Go Ahead Eagles and NEC (both promoted after a four-year absence) were promoted from the 2020–21 Eerste Divisie. ADO Den Haag (relegated after thirteen years in the top flight), VVV-Venlo (relegated after four years in the top flight) and Emmen (relegated after three years in the top flight) have been relegated to 2021–22 Eerste Divisie.

Stadiums and locations
Number of teams by province
Personnel and kits
Note: Flags indicate national team as has been defined under FIFA eligibility rules. Players and managers may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.

Managerial changes
Standings
League table
Results
Fixtures and results
Results by round
European play-offs
The European play-offs were contested by the four highest ranked teams which were not yet qualified for any European tournament. The matches were played on a home-and-away basis, from 18 to 29 May. The winner received a spot in the second qualifying round of the 2022–23 UEFA Europa Conference League.

Qualified teams
Bracket
Semi-finals
First legs
Second legs
Final
First leg
Second leg
Promotion/relegation play-offs
The seeds were assigned based on the final ranking after the regular season. The best ranked team got the highest seed (lowest number). Eredivisie teams were considered to be better ranked than Eerste Divisie teams.
If a match was level at the end of normal playing time, extra time was played (two periods of fifteen minutes each) and followed, if necessary, by a penalty shoot-out to determine the winners.
Seven teams, six from the Eerste Divisie and one from the Eredivisie, played for a spot in the 2022–23 Eredivisie. The remaining six teams played in the 2022–23 Eerste Divisie. The highest seeded team or the team from the Eredivisie always host the second leg.

Qualified teams
Bracket
First round
First legs
Second legs
Semi-finals
First legs
Second legs
Final
First leg
Second leg
Statistics
Top scorers
Hat-tricks
Top assists
Clean sheets
Discipline
Player
Most yellow cards: 10
 Matúš Bero (Vitesse)
 Adam Maher (Utrecht)
 Mark van der Maarel (Utrecht)
Most red cards: 2
 Joris Kramer (Go Ahead Eagles)
 Mike te Wierik (Groningen)

Club
Most yellow cards: 65
Vitesse
Most red cards: 6
Vitesse
Willem II

Awards
Monthly awards
Annual awards
References
External links
Official website