This is a list of films produced by and released under the Walt Disney Pictures banner (known as that since 1983, with Never Cry Wolf as its first release) and films released before that under the former name of the parent company, Walt Disney Productions (1929–1983). Most films listed here were distributed theatrically in the United States by the company's distribution division, Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures, formerly known as Buena Vista Film Distribution Company (1953–1960), Buena Vista Distribution Company (1960–1987) and Buena Vista Pictures Distribution (1987–2007). The Disney features produced before The Living Desert (1953) were originally distributed by United Artists and RKO Radio Pictures, and are now distributed by Walt Disney Studios Motion Pictures. Some films produced by Walt Disney Pictures are also released through the parent company's streaming service, Disney+.
This list is organized by release date and includes live-action feature films (including theatrical, direct-to-video and streaming releases), animated feature films (including films developed and produced by Walt Disney Animation Studios and Pixar Animation Studios) and documentary films (including titles from the True-Life Adventures series and films produced by the Disneynature label). For an exclusive list of animated films released by Walt Disney Pictures and its previous entities see List of Disney theatrical animated feature films and List of Disney feature-length home entertainment releases § Animated films.
This list is only for films released under the main Disney banner. It does not include films produced or released by other existing, defunct or divested labels or subsidiaries owned by Walt Disney Studios (i.e. Marvel Studios, Lucasfilm, 20th Century Studios, Searchlight Pictures, Fox 2000 Pictures, Touchstone Pictures, Hollywood Pictures, National Geographic Documentary Films, Miramax Films, Dimension Films, ESPN Films, etc.) unless they are credited as co-production partners, nor any direct-to-video releases unless they were produced under the main Disney banner, TV films, theatrical re-releases or films originally released by other non-Disney studios.
All films listed are theatrical releases and/or American-based films unless specified.

A ‡ symbol signifies a direct-to-video or streaming release exclusively through Disney+.
A † symbol signifies a premium video on demand release through Disney+.
A § symbol signifies a simultaneous release to theatres and on premium video on demand.
A * symbol signifies a film not produced in the United States, but rather in another country.

Released
1930s–1940s
1950s
1960s
1970s
1980s
1990s
2000s
2010s
2020s
Upcoming
Undated films
In development
See also
In-depth lists by other types

List of Disney feature-length home entertainment releases
List of Disney television films
List of Disney theatrical animated feature films
List of remakes and adaptations of Disney animated films
List of film adaptations of Disney attractions
Disney-branded labels

Lists of Walt Disney Studios films
Operating:

Walt Disney Animation Studios (list)
Disney Channel Original Movies (list)
Pixar Animation Studios (list)
Disneynature
Defunct:

ImageMovers Digital
Skellington Productions
Disneytoon Studios
Other film labels and/or subsidiaries
Operating:

Marvel Studios (list)
Marvel Cinematic Universe (list)
Marvel Television
Lucasfilm Ltd. (list)
20th Century Studios (list)
Searchlight Pictures (list)
20th Century Animation
Star Studios
ESPN Films
Star Studios
Defunct:

Hollywood Pictures
Touchstone Pictures (list)
ABC Motion Pictures (list)
ABC Family (list)
Fox 2000 Pictures
Blue Sky Studios (list)
UTV Motion Pictures
Divested (once owned by Disney):

Miramax (list)
Dimension Films (list)
Related lists

List of Walt Disney Animation Studios short films
List of Disney television series

Notes
References
Further reading
Maltin, Leonard (2000). The Disney Films. New York: Disney Editions. ISBN 978-0-7868-8527-5.
Smith, Dave (2006). Disney A to Z: The Official Encyclopedia (3rd ed.). New York: Disney Editions. ISBN 978-0-7868-4919-2.
"A Complete List of Disney Films". The Walt Disney Company. Archived from the original on August 25, 2011. Retrieved April 23, 2003.
List of all films released by Disney regardless of label—Disney
List of Pre-1980 Live Action Disney Movies and DVD Status Archived February 3, 2023, at the Wayback Machine—UltimateDisney.com
List of 1980–Present Live Action Disney Movies and DVD Status—UltimateDisney.com

External links
Official list of Walt Disney Pictures films