The American singer Katy Perry has received hundreds of awards and nominations throughout her career. Among other accolades, she is the recipient of five American Music Awards, 16 ASCAP Pop Music Awards, five Billboard Music Awards, 19 Guinness World Records, seven MTV Video Music Awards (including the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award), 14 People's Choice Awards, a Juno Award, a Brit Award, two Myx Music Awards, four NRJ Music Awards, two Shorty Awards, and 12 Webby Awards. Perry has also been nominated for a Swiss Music Award, two ARIA Music Awards, 11 MTV Italian Music Awards, 13 Grammy Awards, two Channel V Thailand Music Video Awards, two Q Awards, and two Danish Music Awards.
Her second studio album One of the Boys was released in 2008 and received the 2009 NRJ Music Award for International Album of the Year. Two singles from the album—"I Kissed a Girl" and "Hot n Cold"—were nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Female Pop Vocal Performance in 2009 and 2010 respectively. The former's music video received five MTV Video Music Award nominations and the MTV Video Music Award Japan for Best Pop Video. She received several Best New Artist nominations, including one at the Los Premios MTV Latinoamérica 2008, and won the 2008 MTV Europe Music Award for Best New Act and also won the 2009 Brit Award for International Female Solo Artist. Her third album, Teenage Dream, became the first by a female artist to produce five number-one US Billboard Hot 100 songs—"California Gurls", "Teenage Dream", "Firework", "E.T.", and "Last Friday Night (T.G.I.F.)". For the feat, she received a 2011 honorary American Music Award and an entry in the 2013 edition of Guinness World Records. The album was nominated for six Grammy Awards, including Album of the Year and Record of the Year for "Firework", and won the Juno Award for International Album of the Year.
Perry received ten nominations at the 2011 MTV Video Music Awards, winning Video of the Year for "Firework" along with Best Collaboration and Best Visual Effects for "E.T.". She became the first artist to be nominated for four different videos at a single ceremony. Her single "Wide Awake" from Teenage Dream: The Complete Confection—a reissue of her third album Teenage Dream—was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Pop Solo Performance. In 2012, Billboard magazine declared her the "Woman of the Year" for her contributions to music. Perry's fourth album, Prism, released in 2013, contained the singles "Roar" and "Dark Horse". The former was nominated for Song of the Year and Best Pop Solo Performance at the 56th Annual Grammy Awards. At the following ceremony, the album received a Best Pop Vocal Album nomination while "Dark Horse" was nominated for Best Pop Duo/Group Performance. "Dark Horse" won Single of the Year at the 2014 American Music Awards.
Perry additionally received the Audrey Hepburn Humanitarian Award from UNICEF in 2016, and won "Latin Pop/Urban Song of the Year" from the 2020 iHeartRadio Music Awards for a remix of "Con Calma" with Daddy Yankee and Snow. Her tenure as a judge alongside Lionel Richie and Luke Bryan on American Idol won Outstanding Judging Panel at the American Reality Television Awards in 2021. During the 2023 PETA's Libby Awards, a shoe line of hers titled Katy Perry Collections won Favorite Celeb Vegan Brand. At the 2024 MTV Video Music Awards, she received the Michael Jackson Video Vanguard Award. The following year, Perry received the Brit Billion Award from the British Phonographic Industry (BPI) for obtaining one billion cumulative streams in the United Kingdom.

Awards and nominations
State and cultural honors
Notes


== References ==