American actor, producer, and director Denzel Washington has received numerous accolades including two Academy Awards, two Golden Globe Awards, a Screen Actors Guild Award, and a Tony Award as well as nominations for a Grammy Award, and two Primetime Emmy Awards. Over his career, he has received numerous honorary awards including the BAFTA Los Angeles Britannia Award in 2007, the Golden Globe Cecil B. DeMille Award in 2016, and the AFI Life Achievement Award in 2019. He was supposed to be awarded the Presidential Medal of Freedom by Joe Biden in 2022, but he didn't receive it until 2025.
Washington has received ten Academy Award nominations winning once for Best Supporting Actor for his portrayal of a soldier in the Edward Zwick Civil War film Glory (1989), and Best Actor for playing a corrupt cop in Antoine Fuqua's crime thriller Training Day (2001). He was Oscar-nominated for playing Steve Biko in the historical epic Cry Freedom (1987), the title role in the biographical drama Malcolm X (1992), Rubin Carter in the sports drama The Hurricane (1999), an Airline pilot fighting substance abuse in Flight (2012), a working class family man in the period drama Fences (2015), a Los Angeles lawyer in the legal drama Roman J. Israel, Esq. (2017), and Macbeth in the thriller The Tragedy of Macbeth (2021). Washington was also nominated as a producer for Fences.
Washington is one of nine actors who has been nominated for an acting Academy Award in five different decades (1980s, '90s. 2000s, '10s and '20s), joining Laurence Olivier, Katharine Hepburn, Paul Newman, Jack Nicholson, Michael Caine, Meryl Streep, Frances McDormand and Robert De Niro. He has received nine Golden Globe Award nominations winning twice for his performances in Glory (1989) and The Hurricane (1999). He has also received seven Screen Actors Guild Award nominations winning for Outstanding Actor in a Leading Role for his performance in the film adaptation of Fences (2015).
For his work on stage he received the Tony Award for Best Actor in a Play for his role as Troy Maxon in the Broadway revival of the August Wilson play Fences (2010). He was Tony-nominated for playing a Hickey, hardware salesman in the revival of the Eugene O'Neill play The Iceman Cometh (2018). He received two Primetime Emmy Award nominations for his work with documentary series on the baseball player Hank Aaron and photographer Gordon Parks. He was nominated for the Grammy Award for Best Spoken Word Album for Children for the folk tale, John Henry in 1996.

Major associations
Academy Awards
Emmy Awards
Golden Globe Awards
Grammy Awards
Screen Actors Guild Awards
Tony Awards
Critics awards
Miscellaneous awards
Honorary awards
See also
Denzel Washington on screen and stage
African-American Tony nominees and winners
List of African-American actors
List of black Academy Award winners and nominees
List of actors with Academy Award nominations
List of actors with more than one Academy Award nomination in the acting categories
List of actors with two or more Academy Awards in acting categories
List of black Golden Globe Award winners and nominees

Notes


== References ==