This is a list of notable people from Provo, Utah. This list includes notable individuals born and raised in Provo, those who currently live in Provo, and those who lived for a significant period in Provo.

Notable people
The Aces, indie pop/alternative pop band
Tyson Apostol (b. 1979), contestant on reality TV show Survivor: Tocantins, Survivor: Heroes vs. Villains, and winner of Survivor: Blood vs. Water
Lindsay Arnold (b. 1994), ballroom dancer on Dancing With the Stars
Rylee Arnold (b. 2005), ballroom dancer on Dancing With the Stars
Earl W. Bascom (1906–1995), rodeo champion, inventor, sculptor, actor, inductee of 11 halls of fame, "father of modern rodeo"
Clyde Bawden, composer and performer of contemporary Christian music.
Robbie Bosco (b. 1963), former BYU football player
Paul D. Boyer (1918–2018), recipient of 1997 Nobel Prize in Chemistry
D. J. Butler, science fiction and fantasy writer
Stephen Covey, educator 
John Curtis, U.S. senator; former U.S. congressman and mayor of Provo
Richard Davies, actor
LaVell Edwards, BYU football Hall of Fame coach
Paul Engemann, pop musician best known for his 1983 song "Scarface (Push It to the Limit)"
Avard Fairbanks, sculptor
Jane Hedengren, track and field athlete
Tom Holmoe, former BYU football and San Francisco 49er player; current BYU athletic director
Julianne Hough, professional ballroom dancer on Dancing with the Stars, actress, singer
Imagine Dragons, an indie rock band whose debut album Night Visions peaked at #2 on the Billboard 200
Joshua James, folk singer and founder of Northplatte Records
Merrill Jenson, composer
Bryan Johnson, entrepreneur and anti-aging practitioner
Jenna Johnson, dancer on Dancing with the Stars
Brian Kershisnik, artist 
Goodwin Knight, governor of California 1953-59
Vance Law, Major League Baseball player
Vern Law, Major League Baseball player
Mike Lee, U.S. senator
Rocky Long, defensive coordinator for the Syracuse Orange
Bert McCracken, born in Provo, lead singer of Utah-based band The Used
Kurt Mortensen, author
Neon Trees, new wave, synthpop-rock band
Dallin H. Oaks, member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
The Osmonds raised all nine children in Provo, some of whom continue to live there.
The Osmond Brothers, vocal group, band
Donny Osmond, singer, musician, actor
Marie Osmond, singer, author, actress
Trevor Packer, head of the Advanced Placement program at the College Board
Jack Paepke, baseball player, coach, manager and scout
Janice Kapp Perry, composer, LDS musician
Fred Roberts, NBA player for seven teams including Utah Jazz
Clarence Robison, Olympian and BYU track coach
Josh Rohatinsky, BYU cross-country national champion
Ryan Shupe & the RubberBand, musicians, "Dream Big"
Roland N. Smoot, U.S. vice admiral
Beatrice Sparks, psychologist and author
Lindsey Stirling, hip-hop violinist
Suzanne Storrs, 1955 Miss Utah and television actress
Will Swenson, Tony Award-nominated actor
Edgar A. Wedgwood, adjutant general of the Utah National Guard
Brian Wimmer, actor
Steve Young, quarterback; MVP of Super Bowl XXIX; inductee of Pro Football Hall of Fame and College Football Hall of Fame; record-breaking quarterback for BYU and San Francisco 49ers; television commentator

See also
Robert Redford, Academy Award-winning actor, film director, and producer, founder of the Sundance Film Festival, and longtime resident and owner of Sundance Ski Resort, located just outside Provo


== References ==