The following article is a List of awards and nominations received by Colin Firth.
Colin Firth is an English actor known for his roles in film, television, and theatre. Over his career has received an Academy Award, two BAFTA Awards, a Golden Globe Award and three Screen Actors Guild Awards as well as nominations for two Primetime Emmy Awards.
Firth received the Academy Award for Best Actor for his portrayal as King George VI in Tom Hooper's historical drama The King's Speech (2010). The performance also earned him the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Leading Role, the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor in a Motion Picture – Drama, and the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Actor in a Leading Role. He was previously Oscar-nominated for playing a gay man who lost a long-time partner in the romantic drama A Single Man (2009), which also earned him the BAFTA Award and the Volpi Cup for Best Actor. 
He also received three British Academy Film Award nominations for his performances in the romantic comedy Bridget Jones's Diary (2000), the romantic drama A Single Man (2009), and the historical drama The King's Speech (2010), winning for the later two. He received Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Cast in a Motion Picture nominations for the romantic epic drama The English Patient (1996), and the romantic period comedy-drama Shakespeare in Love (1998), before winning for the historical drama The King's Speech (2010). 
For his work on television, he received two British Academy Television Award nominations for his roles in the BBC projects Tumbledown (1989), and Pride and Prejudice (1996) as well as two Primetime Emmy Award nominations for Outstanding Supporting Actor in a Limited Series or Movie for his role as Dr. Wilhelm Stuckart in the BBC / HBO film Conspiracy (2001), and Outstanding Lead Actor in a Limited Series or Movie for playing Michael Peterson the HBO limited series The Staircase (2022). For the later he also received a Golden Globe Award nomination.

Major associations
Academy Awards
BAFTA Awards
Golden Globe Awards
Emmy Awards
Screen Actors Guild Awards
Critic associations
Critics' Choice Awards
European Film Awards
Other awards


== References ==