Hirosaki Station (弘前駅, Hirosaki-eki) is a railway station  in the city of Hirosaki, Aomori Prefecture, Japan, jointly operated by East Japan Railway Company (JR East) and the private railway operator Kōnan Railway. It is also a freight terminal for the Japan Freight Railway Company.

Lines
Hirosaki Station is served by the Ōu Main Line, and is located 447.1 km from the southern starting point of the Ōu Main Line at Fukushima. Although the terminus of the Gonō Line is at Kawabe, most trains continue on to terminate at Hirosaki for ease of connections. It also forms the terminus of the 16.8 km private Kōnan Railway Kōnan Line to Kuroishi.

Limited express trains
Hirosaki Station is served by the following limited express train services.

Tsugaru (Aomori - Akita)
Akebono overnight sleeper service (Ueno - Aomori)
Nihonkai overnight sleeper service (Osaka - Aomori)

Station layout
Hirosaki Station is an elevated station. The JR portion has a single side platform and an island platform, serving three tracks, and the Kōnan Railway has a bay platform serving another two tracks. The station has a JR East Midori no Madoguchi staffed ticket office and View Plaza travel agency.

JR East platforms
Konan Railway platforms
History
Hirosaki Station opened on December 1, 1894. On September 7, 1927, the Konan Railway also began operations at Hirosaki Station. The station building was again reconstructed in 1981 to incorporate a shopping center. With the privatization of JNR on April 1, 1987, the station came under the operational control of JR East. A new station building was completed in December 2004.

Passenger statistics
In fiscal 2018, the JR East station was used by an average of 4,497 passengers daily (boarding passengers only). The Konan Railway station was used by an average of 2,851 passengers daily in fiscal 2011. The JR East passenger figures for previous years are as shown below.

Surrounding area
Hirosaki Post office
Hirosakiekimae Post Office
Hirosaki Bus terminal

Bus services
Local services
Kōnan Bus
For Karekitaira via Dake hot spring
For Fujishiro via Hamanomashi or Komagoshi
For Goshogawara Station via Fujisaki, Itayanagi and Tsuruta
For Namioka via Fujisaki
For Kuroishi Station via Inakadate
For Koguriyama via Hirosaki University
For Sōma via Akudo
For Tashiro via Kuniyoshi
For Aomori Airport (Express bus)

Long-distance bus services
Jodel (ヨーデル, Yōderu) (operated by Kōnan Bus, JR Bus Tohoku, Iwate-Kenpoku Bus, and Iwate-Kenkōtsu)
For Morioka Station

See also
List of railway stations in Japan

References
External links

JR East station information page (in Japanese)
Konan Railway station information (in Japanese)