The American singer Katy Perry has released seven studio albums, one reissue, seven extended plays (EP), 42 singles (including four as featured artist), and 13 promotional singles. According to the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), Perry is the thirteenth top digital singles artist in the United States, with 121.5 million digital singles and 19 million album units. As of July 2024, she has a total of seven RIAA Diamond-certified records. Billboard listed Perry as the fourth top female artist of the 2010s decade (eighth overall) and the 61st greatest artist of all time. She has scored three number one albums on US Billboard 200 and nine number one songs on US Billboard Hot 100. Throughout her career, Perry has sold over 151 million records worldwide, and is one of the best-selling music artists of all time.
At age 16, she released a self-titled gospel album in March 2001 under her real name Katy Hudson, which failed to chart in any music market. After Perry signed with Capitol Records in April 2007, she released her second album, One of the Boys, in June 2008. Its singles "I Kissed a Girl" and "Hot n Cold" both topped charts in Austria, Canada, Germany, and Switzerland, and have been certified quintuple platinum by the RIAA. The album peaked within the top ten in the United States, Austria, Canada, France, Germany, and Switzerland. Throughout 2009 and 2010, Perry was featured on two singles. The first was on Colorado-based band 3OH!3's song "Starstrukk", and the second was a collaboration with Timbaland on "If We Ever Meet Again", from his album Shock Value II. Both singles reached the top ten in Australia and the United Kingdom, while the latter topped the charts in New Zealand. Perry also performed for MTV Unplugged and a live album of the performance was released in November 2009.
Perry's third studio album Teenage Dream was released in August 2010 and topped the charts in the United States, Australia, Austria, Canada, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom. When its singles "California Gurls", "Teenage Dream", "Firework", "E.T.", and "Last Friday Night (T.G.I.F.)" topped the Billboard Hot 100, Perry became the first woman and only the second artist after Michael Jackson to attain five number-one singles in the United States from one album. The album was re-released in March 2012 as Teenage Dream: The Complete Confection. Its singles "Part of Me" and "Wide Awake" both reached number one in Canada and New Zealand. Her fourth studio album Prism was released in October 2013. Prism became an international success, reaching number one in Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom, and the United States. Its singles "Roar" and "Dark Horse" both topped the charts in the United States and Canada. In the United Kingdom, "Roar" also became Perry's best-selling song, with 2.8 million units sold, and her most-streamed song, with over 218 million streams. She subsequently released an anthem for the 2016 Summer Olympics titled "Rise", which debuted at number one in Australia.
Perry's fifth album Witness followed in June 2017. It topped the charts in the United States and Canada. That year, she was also featured on Calvin Harris's song "Feels" from his album Funk Wav Bounces Vol. 1 along with Big Sean and Pharrell Williams, which reached number one in the United Kingdom. In 2018, she released the Christmas single "Cozy Little Christmas". This was followed by the release of the collaborations "365" (with Zedd) and "Con Calma" (remix, with Daddy Yankee and Snow). She released the non-album singles "Never Really Over", "Small Talk" and "Harleys in Hawaii" in 2019. Smile and 143 respectively followed as her sixth and seventh albums in August 2020 and September 2024. Both reached the top 10 of the album charts in the United States, Australia, New Zealand, and the United Kingdom.

Albums
Studio albums
Reissues
Extended plays
Box sets
Singles
As lead artist
2000s
2010s
2020s
As featured artist
Promotional singles
Other charted or certified songs
2000s
2010s
2020s
Footnotes
Notes for albums and songs

Notes for peak chart positions


== References ==