The A92 is a major road that runs through Fife, Dundee, Angus, Aberdeenshire, and Aberdeen City in Scotland. From south to north, it runs from Dunfermline to Blackdog, just north of Aberdeen.

History
The A92's original route in southern Fife is now numbered as the A921. It connects with the M90 junction 1 via Burntisland and Kirkcaldy and links into the Thornton bypass.
Plans were drawn up in the 1960s for a new East Fife regional dual carriageway road starting at the M90 at Masterton (Junction 2), which would have mirrored what is now the A921 and B9157 to the Mossgreen area, before heading north-eastward to Chapel Level, connecting up with the Thornton By-pass.  The plans were held back until the early 1970s, and were held back further due to the Oil crisis. During the 1970s the Scottish Development Department commissioned a new traffic study which concluded that the A92 should follow the more northern route to provide a better link for Cowdenbeath and Lochgelly before connecting directly onto the Thornton Bypass, which was completed by early 1983.
The new section between Crossgates and Glenrothes began construction in 1980, and was built in four phases:

Thornton By-pass: Opened on 16 August 1983
Halbeath - Cowdenbeath: Opened in September 1985
Cowdenbeath - Lochgelly: Opened on 13 August 1987
Lochgelly - Thornton: the final phase which opened on 16 July 1990
In early April 1998 the A92 was extended beyond the Crossgates junction to provide direct access with the M90 southbound, to ease congestion around the Halbeath interchange. The new section was built three months ahead of schedule, costing £8.4m.

Numbering
The A92 formerly continued north from Stonehaven through Aberdeen, and terminated at Fraserburgh. The section between Stonehaven and Aberdeen was renumbered A90 in 1994. Upon completion of the Aberdeen Western Peripheral Route (AWPR) in 2018, the section between Stonehaven and Blackdog was once again numbered as A92. The section between Blackdog and Fraserburgh has now been renumbered A90 and A952.
The section of the A92 between Dundee and Aberdeen was formerly part of the Euroroute system, on route E120, a closed loop connecting Inverness, Aberdeen, Dundee and Perth.

Route
Starting at its junction with the M90 motorway, at the Halbeath Junction on the east of Dunfermline, it runs north east past Cowdenbeath, Lochgelly, Kirkcaldy. From the Redhouse Roundabout, just north of Dysart, it heads in a much more northernly direction through Glenrothes, and then bypassing Freuchie, Ladybank and Newport-on-Tay.  The road is a dual carriageway from the M90 to Glenrothes town centre, changing to a single carriageway as it passes through the northern side of the town, before switching back to dual carriageway north of Glenrothes (until it meets the A912 towards Perth and the A914 towards St Andrews), it reverts to a single carriageway until a few miles short of the Tay Road Bridge at Dundee.  The section through Fife is often described as the East Fife Regional Road.
The road then travels across the Tay Road Bridge, the A92 travels along the south of Dundee, briefly merging with other roads. At the Scott Fyffe Roundabout in the Craigie area of Dundee, the road continues along the east coast bypassing Monifieth, Carnoustie and Muirdrum. When it reaches Arbroath, it becomes the main trunk road heading north along the coast. Skirting Inverkeilor, the road continues as the main trunk road through Montrose and St Cyrus, before skirting Benholm and Johnshaven. It then enters through Inverbervie, Roadside of Kinneff and Roadside of Catterline, before passing the Fowlsheugh Nature Reserve and then reaching the outskirts of Stonehaven where the road once again becomes dual carriageway. From here, the A92 runs parallel with the A90 for around 2 miles. The road then continues past Stonehaven, Muchalls, Newtonhill, and Portlethen heading into the city of Aberdeen at the Bridge of Dee. The road heads in a northernly direction through Aberdeen, to the west of the city centre. At Persley, it turns east, heading towards Bridge of Don. It then heads north for about three miles, before terminating at Blackdog, where the road once again merges with the A90.
The 16-mile section of the road from Dundee to Arbroath was upgraded to dual carriageway standard in 2005 and significantly improved both the safety of the route and the journey time between the two towns. Between Arbroath and Stonehaven the road is a single carriageway apart from a very short section of dual carriageway near Gourdon. The road returns to dual carriageway from Stonehaven heading north to Aberdeen, briefly returning to single carriageway at the Bridge of Dee, and then again returning to single carriageway between the Haudagain and Parkway roundabouts in Aberdeen. The remainder of the road from the Parkway roundabout to the termination point at Blackdog is dual carriageway.

Changes
In 2024, work began to reduce the A92 within Arbroath to single-carriageway as part a remodelling that will see a dedicated cycle path and additional green space added.

Archaeological
The A92 road traverses lands on which prehistorical archaeological sites are present. Examples of these features include Gourdon Hill and the Stone of Morphie, both situated slightly to the west of the A92 alignment.

References
External links
 Media related to A92 road (Scotland) at Wikimedia Commons
The Motorway Archive. M90. Inverkeithing to Perth motorway and M85. Perth by-pass
A92 - Roader's Digest: The SABRE Wiki
East Fife Regional Road - Roader's Digest: The SABRE Wiki