Royston Sagigi-Baira, also known as Royston Noell, is an Australian singer best known for winning the eighth season of Australian Idol in 2023. He officially won the title in March 2023, $100,000 prize money and a recording contract with Sony Music Australia.

Early life
Royston Sagigi-Baira is a Thanakwith (Aboriginal) and Wagadagam (Torres Strait Islander) man from Mapoon, Queensland.
Sagigi-Baira reflected saying "Most kids wanted to play rugby or go fishing, but I just wanted to sing It's all I ever wanted to do.". In year 2, his teacher gave him High School Musical DVD as a prize, saying "I took it home and watched it over and over again and completely fell in love with music, especially singing."
Sagigi-Baira sang in church and in school. Sagigi-Baira attended the Aboriginal Centre for the Performing Arts (ACPA) in Brisbane and as of 2023, is in his second year of a Bachelor of Fine Arts (Music) degree at the Queensland University of Technology.

Career
2018–2022: All Together Now
In 2018, Sagigi-Baira competed on the Australian version of All Together Now, becoming the first contestant to snag a perfect score of 100 performiong Sam Smith's "Lay Me Down" eventually been the last contestant eliminated behind Lai Utovou and Tarryn Stokes.
During NAIDOC Week in July 2022, Aboriginal Christian leader, poet and writer Brooke Prentis spoke with Sagigi-Baira on national radio about the theme "Get Up! Stand up! Show up!"
In November 2022, Sagigi-Baira released his debut single "When I Fall Apart" under the name Royston Noell.

2023: Australian Idol
In 2023, Sagigi-Baira audition for the Seven Network reboot of Australian Idol with the song "I'm Not the Only One" by Sam Smith, receiving a golden ticket to the top 50. He went on to advance through from the top 50 to the top 24, and then made it to the top 12 live shows.
Sagigi-Baira advanced through to the top ten, then top eight and then top 6 before finding himself in the grand finale, and final three.
Upon being announced as a grand finalist Noell said "I can't believe this. This is crazy. This is a testament [to the fact] that no matter where you come from, as long as you work hard, you can follow your dreams, and they can come true."

After a performance on Whitney Houston's "When You Believe", Sagigi-Baira was announced as the winner.
Immediately after the announcement, his winners single "Invincible", written by Tones and I, was released. 
The song was compared to Rihanna's "Diamonds" on Radio 6PR.
In November 2023, he released "Dreaming".
In November 2024, Noell released "Feeling Good" and announced the release of his debut EP Sunrise.

Personal life
Sagigi-Baira is currently residing in Cape York, in far north Queensland.

Discography
Extended plays
Singles
Awards and nominations
National Indigenous Music Awards
The National Indigenous Music Awards recognise excellence, innovation and leadership among Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander musicians from throughout Australia. They commenced in 2004.


== References ==