A hushpuppy is a small, savory, deep-fried round ball made from cornmeal-based batter.
Hushpuppies are frequently served as a side dish with seafood and other deep-fried foods.

History
The use of ground corn in cooking originated with Native Americans, who first cultivated the crop. Cherokee, Chickasaw, Choctaw, Creek, and Seminole cooking introduced one of its main staples into Southern cuisine: corn, either ground into meal or limed with an alkaline salt to make hominy, in a Native American technology known as nixtamalization. Cornbread was popular during the American Civil War because it was inexpensive and could be made in many different shapes and sizes. It could be fashioned into high-rising, fluffy loaves or simply fried for a quick meal.To a far greater degree than anyone realizes, several of the most important food dishes that the Southeastern Indians live on today is the "soul food" eaten by both black and white Southerners. ... Indian boiled cornbread is present in Southern cuisine as "corn meal dumplings", ... and as "hush puppies"...
Some have assigned influence to the founding ceremony of the convent of Ursuline nuns who settled in New Orleans after leaving France, where they served croquettes de maïs (corn croquettes).
Hushpuppies are strongly associated with the Southern United States. A southern hushpuppy championship was held annually in Lufkin, Texas between 1972 and 2022, and they are also available throughout the United States at restaurants serving deep-fried seafood.

Name
The first recorded use of the word dates to 1899. The name has no verified origin. Etymology is attributed to a variety of sources; one such source alleges that the food was given the name when hunters and fishers would feed the food to dogs they brought with them in order to "hush them", or get them to quiet down. Although there are many possible origins for the dish, it is found to be akin to "red-horse bread", named after the red horse fish of the South Carolina rivers. Associated with formerly enslaved chef Romeo Govan, "red horse bread" is said to have been similar in consistency and ingredients. "Red horse bread" of South Carolina then became "hushpuppies" in Georgia around 1927, then gained national traction around 1943 in Florida.

Characteristics and preparation
Typical hush puppy ingredients include cornmeal, wheat flour, eggs, salt, baking soda, milk or buttermilk, and water, and may include onion, spring onion (scallion), garlic, whole kernel corn, and peppers. Sometimes pancake batter is used. The batter is mixed well, adjusting ingredients until thick, and dropped a spoonful at a time into hot oil. Many older recipes call for the batter to be cooked in the same oil as the fish it accompanies. The small corn dumplings are fried until crispy golden brown, and cooled. Hush puppies are often served with seafood or barbecued foods. They are commonly made at home or served in restaurants advertising home-style food.

Caribbean
In Jamaica, such fried bread dumplings are known as "festivals", and are made from a flour and cornmeal dough, with added salt and sugar, which is then formed into hot dog bun shapes and deep-fried. They are sweeter than hushpuppies, which often contain onion or garlic. They are served with jerked meats such as pork or chicken. Mostly, it is served with fried or escoveitch (see also escabeche and ceviche) fish. 
In Puerto Rico, hushpuppies are made in the shape of a short sausage and are called "sorullos" or the diminutive "sorullitos", for smaller sizes. Sugar is added to the cornmeal and can be stuffed with cheddar cheese or cream cheese with guava. They are served with coffee, guava dipping sauce, or fry sauce.

See also
List of fried dough foods
List of maize dishes
List of quick breads
List of regional dishes of the United States


== References ==