Anthem Lights is an American Christian vocal quartet with roots in Nashville, Tennessee and at Liberty University. The group, all of whom having studied at Liberty between 2003 and 2009 without ever having met, began performing in 2007 using the name Yellow Cavalier. On May 26, 2009, they independently released their first and only EP using the Yellow Cavalier name. The group's debut album under their current name was released on May 10, 2011, by Reunion Records, and they tallied five subsequent full-length releases prior to being dropped by the label in 2023.

Beginnings
Anthem Lights began as a solo project for vocalist Chad Graham in the fall of 2007. Both he and Alan Powell were living in Los Angeles, writing music for Graham's solo project. As the last of the vocal tracks were being finalized, both men realized that the songs they'd written were more appropriate for an ensemble than a solo act. It was then that Powell and Graham decided to alert their contacts at Liberty University in an effort to recruit members for what is now a singing group. Powell and Graham's contacts came to a consensus that Kyle Kupecky and Caleb Grimm would be the best candidates for the project. After receiving notifications by e-mail, Graham flew from Los Angeles to meet with Kupecky and Grimm, who gladly accepted membership. Powell joined the group at the last minute.
The original name of the group was Yellow Cavalier. The group recorded one self-titled EP under this name in 2009. The EP was released independently on May 26, 2009. The group changed their name to Anthem Lights before any other projects were released.

Name change
The group's name changed to Anthem Lights sometime after their independent release as Yellow Cavalier. Months later, the group signed to Reunion Records. Vocalist Kyle Kupecky comments about the meaning behind the name:

These songs [and] this record is our anthem to the world saying, "Listen, we know there's a lot of darkness in this life, but in the end, light is gonna win." And we wanna be the light to people and just show them who the light of the world is.
On February 1, 2011, Anthem Lights released the Anthem Lights EP. Although it was the second EP by the group, it was the first on Reunion Records and the first under their current name. The EP received very positive reviews and chart success as "Can't Shut Up," the first track from the EP, peaked at No. 42 on Billboard's Christian Songs chart and at No. 27 on the CHR radio charts. All of the tracks on the EP were also featured on their debut album, which was also self-titled. The album was released May 10, 2011.
On May 7, 2012, the group announced their first lineup change with the news that Kyle Kupecky had left the group, adding later that day that they had already selected someone to replace him. One week later, on May 14, 2012, they introduced Joseph "Joey" Stamper as the new member during a livestream on Ustream.

Anthem Lights performed on the Listen to the Sound Tour. The tour was headlined by Building 429, since the tour carried the same name as their latest album, and it featured Revive. Anthem Lights performed on the 2011 Rock & Worship Roadshow tour along with MercyMe, Jars of Clay, and The Afters.
The album You Have My Heart was released on February 4, 2014. The album Escape was released on October 14, 2014.
On February 1, 2016, former singer-guitarist-pianist Alan Powell left the band to pursue a career in acting.
On April 7, 2017, they released their fourth album, Hymns. On October 12, 2017, they released their fifth album, Painted Skies. This is their first album with Spencer Kane, a solo Christian artist formerly of the TV Series iShine Knect of TBN Studios and a 6 time award winner and Billboard charting indie artist.
On February 2, 2018, the band released a compilation album called Better Together: The Mixtape, which features an acoustic version of their song Better Together, along with solo music from each of the members, On March 16, 2018, they released their sixth album, Hymns Vol. II.

Members
Current members
Chad Graham – vocals
Caleb Grimm – vocals
Spencer Kane – vocals
Joey Stamper – vocals, piano, guitar, drums

Former members
Kyle Kupecky – vocals
Alan Powell – vocals, guitar, piano

Discography
Studio albums
Studio EPs
Singles
Compilation appearances


== References ==