Biryani () is a mixed rice dish originating in South Asia, traditionally made with rice, meat (chicken, goat, lamb, beef) or seafood (prawns or fish), and spices.
Biryani is one of the most popular dishes in South Asia and among the South Asian diaspora, though the dish is often associated with the region's Muslim population in particular. Regional variations exist, such as regarding the addition of eggs and/or potatoes, as well as religious ones, such as the replacement of meat with paneer or vegetables by vegetarians. Similar dishes are also prepared in many other countries like Iraq and Malaysia, and was often spread to such places by South Asian diaspora populations. Biryani is the single most-ordered dish on Indian online food ordering and delivery services, and has been described as the most popular dish in India.

Etymology
Theories propose that the word biryani comes from birinj (Persian: برنج), the Persian word for rice. Another theory states that it is derived from biryan or beriyan (Persian: بریان), which means "to fry" or "to roast". It may alternatively be related to the Persian word bereshtan (Persian: برشتن) which also means "to roast (onions)", as the dish is often prepared by flavouring rice with fried onions and meat, along with mild spices.

Origin
According to the historian Lizzie Collingham, the modern biryani developed in the royal kitchens of the Mughal Empire (1526–1857) and is a mix of the native spicy rice dishes of South Asia and the Persian polao. Indian restaurateur Kris Dhillon believes that the dish originated in Persia and was brought to South Asia by the Mughals. Salma Hossein, whom the BBC has dubbed the "doyenne of Islamic cooking in India," shares a similar view, asserting that biryani came to South Asia from Persia even before the Mughal era. Food scholar Pushpesh Pant also challenges the Mughal-origin claim, stating that it originated in Iran and that "there is no evidence that biryani first came to this land with the Mughals. It is far more probable that it travelled with pilgrims and soldier-statesmen of noble descent to the Deccan region in South India".
Another theory claims that the dish was prepared in South Asia before the first Mughal emperor Babur conquered India. The 16th-century Mughal text Ain-i-Akbari makes no distinction between biryanis and pilaf (or pulao): it states that the word "biryani" is of older usage in India. A similar theory, that biryani came to India with Timur's invasion, appears to be incorrect because there is no record of biryani having existed in his native land during that period.
Pratibha Karan, author of Biryani, writes how biryani is of Mughal origin, derived from pilaf varieties brought to the Indian subcontinent by Arab and Persian traders. She speculates that the pulao was an army dish in medieval India. Armies would prepare a one-pot dish of rice with any available red meat. Over time, the dish became biryani due to different methods of cooking, with the distinction between "pulao" and "biryani" being arbitrary.
According to Vishwanath Shenoy, the owner of a biryani restaurant chain in India, one branch of biryani comes from the Mughals, while another was brought by the Arab traders to Malabar in South India.
There are various apocryphal stories dating the invention to Shah Jahan's time but Rana Safvi, the distinguished historian, says she could only find a recipe from the later Mughal period, from Bahadur Shah Zafar's time. It is not her claim that there was no biryani before that; just that she has not found a recipe. Other historians who have gone through texts say that the first references to biryani only appear around the 18th century.

Southern India
In Southern India, where rice is more widely used as a staple food, several distinct varieties of biryani emerged from Hyderabad in Telangana, Vijayawada in Andhra Pradesh, Mangalore and Bhatkal in Coastal Karnataka, Thalassery in Kerala, as well as Ambur and Chettinad in Tamil Nadu.

Local varieties
Hyderabadi biryani
Kerala biriyani
Kolkata biryani
Sindhi biryani
Thalassery biryani
Travancore Biriyani

Difference between biryani and pulao
Pilaf or pulao, as it is known on the Indian subcontinent, is another mixed rice dish popular in the cuisines of the Indian subcontinent, Central Asia, and Middle Eastern cuisine. Opinions differ on the differences between pulao and biryani, and whether there is actually a difference between the two.
According to Delhi-based historian Sohail Hashmi, pulao tends to be plainer than biryani, and consists of meat or vegetables cooked with rice with the bottom layered with potatoes or onions. Biryani contains more gravy (or yakhni), and is often cooked longer, leaving the meat (and vegetables, if present) more tender, and the rice more flavoured. Biryani is also cooked with additional dressings and often would have a light layer of scorched rice at the bottom.
Author Pratibha Karan states that while the terms are often applied arbitrarily, the main distinction is that a biryani consists of two layers of rice with a layer of meat (and vegetables, if present) in the middle, while the pulao is not layered.
Author Colleen Taylor Sen lists the following distinctions between biryani and pulao:

Biryani is the primary dish in a meal, while the pulao is usually a secondary accompaniment to a larger meal.
In biryani, meat (and vegetables, if present) and rice are cooked separately before being layered and cooked together for the gravy to absorb into the rice. Pulao is a single-pot dish: meat (or vegetables) and rice are cooked separately and they are not mixed. However, some other writers have reported pulao recipes in which the rice and meat are cooked together and then simmered for dum cooking until the liquid is absorbed.
Biryanis have more complex and stronger spices compared to pulao.
The British-era author Abdul Halim Sharar mentions that biryani has a stronger taste of curried rice due to a greater amount of spices.

Ingredients
Ingredients for biryani are extensive and vary according to the region and the type of meat and vegetables used. Meat (chicken, goat, beef, lamb, prawn or fish) is the prime ingredient with rice. As is common in dishes of South Asia, vegetables are sometimes also used when preparing biryani. Corn may be used, depending on the season and availability. Navratan biryani tends to use sweeter, richer ingredients such as cashews, sultanas (kishmish), and fruits such as apples and pineapples.
The spices and condiments used in biryani may include fennel seeds, ghee (clarified butter), nutmeg, mace, pepper, cloves, cardamom, cinnamon, bay leaves, coriander, mint, ginger, onions, tomatoes, green chilies, star anise, and garlic. The premium varieties include saffron. Some commercial recipes for biryani also include aromatic essences such as Mitha attar, kewra and rose water. Dried sour prunes (Plum is called alu bukhara) may also be added to the biryani. In nasi briyani and other variants made in Southeast Asian countries such as Malaysia, Singapore, and Indonesia, typical Southeast Asian spices and aromatics such as pandan leaf may be used alongside typical South Asian spices.
The main ingredient that usually accompanies the spices is chicken, lamb or goat meat; special varieties might use beef or seafood instead. The dish may be served with raita, dahi chutney, or other accompaniments to soothe the biryani and lower the heat from the spices in the biryani. Other sides include seekh kebab, Qorma, curry, a sour dish of aubergine (brinjal), boiled eggs, and salad.

Preparation styles
Biryani can be cooked using one of two styles/techniques, pakki ("cooked") and kacchi ("raw").

In a pakki biryani, the rice, marinated meat, and any vegetables are partially ("three-quarters") cooked separately, before being combined into layers in a cooking vessel. Different layers of rice may be treated with different spices (e.g., with dissolved saffron or turmeric to give the rice different colours and flavours). The contents are then baked to complete the cooking and allow the flavours to combine. Alternatively, the components may be fully cooked, and then simply combined by layering before serving.
In a kacchi biryani, layers of raw marinated meat are alternated in layers with wet, pre-soaked, raw rice (which may be treated with different spices as above), and cooked together by baking, or medium-to-low direct heat (typically, for at least an hour). Cooking occurs by a process of steaming from the ingredients' own moisture: the cooking vessel's lid is sealed (traditionally, with a strip of wheat dough) so that steam cannot escape (proper dum pukht).
A yoghurt-based marinade at the bottom of the cooking pot provides additional flavour and moisture.  Potatoes often comprise the bottom layer (a technique also used in Iranian cuisine), because, with their natural moisture content, they brown well with less risk of getting burned accidentally. The lid is not opened until the dish is ready to serve. Kacchi biryani is technically much more demanding and time-consuming than pakki biryani, for the following reasons:
The different ingredients—meat, rice, vegetables—have different cooking times: tender cuts of meat/chicken can be fully cooked well before the rice is done. To prevent this, many kacchi recipes use parboiled (semi-cooked) rice rather than raw rice.
If direct heat is used, there is a risk that the food layer in contact with the vessel bottom may get burned while the interior's contents are still raw. This risk is minimized by sustained baking with moderate heat or very slow cooking on low direct heat. This approach, however, increases cooking time considerably.
One method is cooking the dish "blind", with the cooking vessel sealed, so one cannot monitor the cooking progress—it takes expertise and understanding of the raw foods used, the heat required to cook those raw foods, and how the climate can affect the cooking process. Hence making kacchi biryani requires a seasoned hand.

Varieties
On the Indian subcontinent
There are many types of biryani, whose names are often based on their region of origin. For example, Sindhi biryani developed in the Sindh region of what is now Pakistan, and Hyderabadi biryani developed in the city of Hyderabad in South India.
Some have taken the name of the shop that sells it, for example: Haji Biriyani, Haji Nanna Biriyani in Old Dhaka, Fakhruddin Biriyani in Dhaka, Students biryani in Karachi, Lucky biryani in Bandra, Mumbai and Baghdadi biryani in Colaba, Mumbai. Biryanis are often specific to the Muslim communities where they originate; they are usually the defining dishes of those communities.

Ambur/Vaniyambadi biryani
Ambur/Vaniyambadi biryani is a variety cooked in the neighboring towns of Ambur and Vaniyambadi in the Tirupattur district of the northeastern part of Tamil Nadu, which houses a high Muslim population. It was introduced during the time of the Nawabs of Arcot who once ruled the area. It is typically made with jeera samba rice. Nowadays, it is popular as both  Ambur or Vaniyambadi style biryani as those are two prominent towns along the popular Bangalore to Chennai highway, where travellers are known to stop for eating.
The Ambur/Vaniyambadi biryani is often accompanied by dhalcha, a sour brinjal curry, and pachadi or raitha (sliced onions mixed with plain yogurt, tomato, chilies, and salt). It is known to have a distinctive aroma and is considered light on the stomach. The usage of spice is moderate, and curd is used as a gravy base. It also utilizes a higher ratio of meat to rice. Ambur-style biryani is popular as a street food all across South India.

Bhatkali/Navayathi biryani
This is an integral part of the Navayath cuisine and a specialty of Bhatkal, a coastal town in Karnataka. Its origins are traced to the Persian traders who introduced biryani along with kababs and Indian breads. In Bhatkali biryani, the meat is cooked in an onion and green chili-based masala and layered with fragrant rice. It has a unique spicy flavour, and the rice is overwhelmingly white with mild streaks of orange. Its variations include beef, goat, chicken, titar (partridge), egg, fish, crab, prawn, and vegetable biryani.
Though similar to those in Thalassery, this biryani differs with lingering after-notes of mashed onions laced with garlic. A few chilies and spices littered with curry leaves lends a unique flavour to Bhatkali biryani. No oil is used.
Another variety common among the Navayath mainly involves rice vermicelli being used as a substitute for rice, therefore lending this biryani the name  shayya or shayyo as a result of its use. Like many other recipes, the meat, typically chicken, is first cooked with spices and yoghurt, with the vermicelli and fried onions being added later.

Bohri biryani
This biryani, traditionally made by the Bohri community, is one with a rich history. The Bohris, originally from Yemen, migrated mainly to Gujarat and other parts of India between the 11th and 13th centuries. As a result, the dish incorporates both Yemeni and Gujarati influences. The recipe is typically standard and can vary, although its signature ingredients include crispy potatoes along with even more tomatoes and onions. It is seemingly also a dish in Pakistan.

Chettinad biryani
Chettinad biryani is famous in the Indian state of Tamil Nadu. It is mostly made using jeera samba rice, and is known to have a distinct aroma of spices and ghee.This biryani is usually paired with nenju elumbu kuzhambu, a spicy and tangy goat meat gravy . The podi kozhi is usually topped with fried onions and curry leaves.

Degh ki biryani/akhni biryani of Parbhani
Degh ki biryani is a traditional biryani dish made with small cubes of beef or mutton. This biryani is believed to have originated in the Ahmadnagar Sultanate and is particularly famous in Parbhani, a city in the Marathwada region of Maharashtra. It is commonly served at weddings.
The meat is marinated with a blend of spices, including ginger, garlic, red chili powder, cumin, garam masala, fried onions, and curd, enhancing its rich flavor. This biryani is also referred to as kachay gosht ki biryani or dum biryani, as the marinated meat is slow-cooked with fragrant, short-grained rice under dum (sealed, slow-cooking method) to enhance its aroma and taste. The dish is cooked on a low flame using the dum method, allowing the flavors to infuse deeply, resulting in a rich, aromatic biryani.

Delhi biryani
The Delhi version of biryani developed a unique local flavour as the Mughal kings shifted their political capital to the North Indian city of Delhi. Until the 1950s, most people cooked biryani in their home and rarely ate at eateries outside of their homes. Hence, restaurants primarily catered to travellers and merchants. Any region that saw more of these two classes of people nurtured more restaurants, and thus their own versions of biryani. This is the reason why most shops that sold biryani in Delhi tended to be near mosques such as Jama Masjid (for travellers) or traditional shopping districts (such as Chandni Chowk).
Each part of Delhi has its own style of biryani, often based on its original purpose, thus giving rise to Nizamuddin biryani, Shahjahanabad biryani, and others.  Nizamuddin biryani usually had little expensive meat and spices as it was primarily meant to be made in bulk for offering at the Nizamuddin Dargah shrine and thereafter to be distributed to devotees. A non-dum biryani, using many green chillies, popularized by the Babu Shahi Bawarchi shops located outside the National Sports Club in Delhi, is informally called Babu Shahi biryani. Another version of Delhi biryani uses achaar (pickles) and is called achaari biryani.

Dhakaiya biryani
The city of Dhaka in Bangladesh used to be the capital of Bengal Subah and is known for Dhakaiya kacchi biryani, a chevon biryani made with highly seasoned rice and goat meat. The recipe includes highly seasoned rice, goat meat, mustard oil, garlic, onion, black pepper, saffron, clove, cardamom, cinnamon, salt, lemon, doi, peanuts, cream, raisins and a small amount of cheese (either from cows or buffalo). It is accompanied by borhani, a salted mint drink made of yogurt, coriander, mint and salt.
Haji biryani is a favourite among Bangladeshis living abroad. A recipe was handed down by the founder of one Dhaka restaurant to the next generation. Haji Mohammad Shahed claimed, "I have never changed anything, not even the amount of salt". Bengali-style biryani often includes potatoes.

Dindigul biryani
The city of Dindigul in Tamil Nadu is noted for its biryani, which uses a little curd and lemon juice for a tangy taste.

Donne biryani
According to some historians, this biryani is believed to have originated many centuries ago, although the purported origins are numerous and disputed. One historical account states that in 1638, Shahaji Bhosale of the Maratha Empire achieved his conquest of Bangalore in Karnataka, and his descendants set up and ran these new establishments called "military hotels".
Today, the military hotels of Bangalore are well known for selling biryani served in dried leaf bowls called donne in Kannada. Like many other biryani varieties in South India, it uses standard short-grain seeraga samba rice. Along with yogurt and spices, it contains a gravy, mainly composed of mint, coriander leaves and green chillies, that gives the biryani its signature green colour. To impart a specific taste, the recipe for this biryani usually includes either kapok buds (known as Marathi moggu) or stone flowers as additional spices. The choice of meat can be either chicken or mutton.

Hyderabadi biryani
Hyderabadi biryani is India's most famous biryani; some say biryani is synonymous with Hyderabad. Hyderabadi biryani developed in Hyderabad Subah under the rule of Asaf Jah I, who was first appointed as the governor of Deccan by the Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb. It is made with basmati rice, spices and goat meat. Popular variations use chicken instead of goat meat. There are various forms of Hyderabadi biryani, such as kachay gosht ki biryani or dum biryani, where goat meat is marinated and cooked along with the rice. It is left on a slow fire or dum for a fragrant and aromatic flavour.

Kutchi/Memoni biryani
Memoni or Kutchi biryani is an extremely spicy variety developed by the Memons of Gujarat-Sindh region in India and Pakistan. It is made with mutton, dahi, fried onions, and potatoes, and fewer tomatoes compared to Sindhi biryani.

Kalyani biryani
Kalyani biryani is a beef biryani from the former state of Hyderabad Deccan. Also known as the "poor man's"  Hyderabadi biryani, Kalyani biryani is made from small cubes of buffalo meat or cow meat. 
The meat is flavoured with ginger, garlic, turmeric, red chili, cumin, coriander powder, and considerable amounts of onion and tomato. It is first cooked in a thick curry and then cooked along with rice. It is then cooked dum-style (the Indian method of steaming in a covered pot). It has a distinct flavour of tomatoes, jeera and dhania. 
Kalyani biryani is supposed to have originated in Bidar during the reign of the Kalyani Nawabs, who migrated to Hyderabad in the mid-18th century after one of the Nawabs, Ghazanfur Jang, married into the Asaf Jahi family and united their realms. Kalyani biryani was served by the Kalyani Nawabs to all of their subjects who came from Bidar to Hyderabad and stayed or visited their devdi or noble mansion.

Kizhi biryani
This variant of biryani is well-known in the state of Kerala, and gets its name from the method by which it is prepared. The recipe is considerably different from many others due to its preparation and assemblage. The meat can typically be chicken, fish or chemmeen (prawns), depending on the region. Unlike other methods, the meat is marinated in spices and lemon juice and cooked separately, as are the rice and gravy. Coconut milk is used as a signature ingredient to enrich the texture.
The easily distinguishable aspect of this biryani is in its serving. A banana leaf is cut in half and tempered, and the meat, rice and gravy are all placed together in a particular fashion on its surface, involving some herbs and birista (fried onions). Additional accompaniments may include eggs and coconut chutney. After assembly, the biryani is wrapped within the leaf and steamed. Due to the manner in which it is cooked and served, this is most likely ideal to be consumed by only one person.

Kolkata biryani
Calcutta or Kolkata biryani evolved from Dhakaiya biryani and Lucknow-style biryani when Awadh's last Nawab, Wajid Ali Shah, was exiled in 1856 to the Kolkata suburb of Metiabruz. Shah brought his personal chef with him. Like Dhakaiya biryani,  Kolkata biryani is characterized by the presence of potatoes.

Lucknow biryani
Lucknow was a capital of Awadh Subah. For Lucknow, or Awadhi, biryani, basmati rice is cooked in ghee with warm, aromatic spices and then layered with a type of meat curry or marinade, sealed, and cooked over low heat until done.

Beary biryani (Mangalorean-style biryani)
Beary biryani is a specialty of the Beary community in coastal Karnataka and is also referred to as Mangalorean-style biryani. This biryani is distinct for its use of green chilies and coconut, giving it a rich, mildly spicy flavor with subtle hints of fennel. The spice blend typically includes nutmeg, mace (javitri), fennel seeds, poppy seeds, star anise, almonds, and fresh mint leaves. The rice and meat (mutton, chicken, or beef) are first cooked separately, then layered and slow-cooked together in the dum style, allowing the flavors to blend harmoniously. This biryani is popularly served at weddings and family gatherings.

MLA Potlam biryani
This viral style of biryani traces its origins to "The Spicy Venue" restaurant in Hyderabad. The recipe is  unique and easily distinguishable from every other biryani by appearance. It is composed of a mutton keema and prawn biryani wrapped inside an omurice-style seasoned omelette.

Rowther biryani
This type of biryani is popular in the Palakkad and Coimbatore regions. This was most commonly prepared by Rowther families in Kerala and Tamil Nadu. This type of biryani is cooked in a different style. Goat meat is most commonly used and it is entirely different from Malabar biryani.

Sindhi biryani
The exotic and aromatic Sindhi biryani, originating in the former Mughal subah based in Thatta, is known in Pakistan for its spicy taste, fragrant rice, and delicate meat. Sindhi biryani is a staple in food menus of Pakistani and Sindhi cuisine. This biryani is prepared with meat and a mixture of basmati rice, vegetables, and various spices.

Sofiyani biryani
Also known as safeeda biryani, this variant of biryani is another with Hyderabadi origins. It was said to have been created for a Nizam who was very fond of biryani but was unable to digest spices. Today, the recipe mainly involves khoya and almond paste as a base along with meat and many other ingredients, with no trace of red chillies or chilli powder, which leads to the so-called "white" look of this dish. Green chillies may be used as an alternative.

Sri Lankan biryani
Biryani was introduced in the 1900s to Sri Lanka by the Indian Muslims who engaged in trade within the country.  In many cases, Sri Lankan biryani is spicier than most Indian varieties. Side dishes may include Malay pickle, cashew curry and mint sambol.

Thalassery biryani
Thalassery biryani is the variation of biryani found in the Indian state of Kerala. It is one of the many dishes of the Kerala Muslim community.
The primary ingredients are chicken with spices, with the unique ingredient being the choice of rice, called khyma. Khyma rice is generally mixed with ghee. Although a large number of spices such as mace, cashew nuts, sultana raisins, fennel and cumin seeds, tomatoes, onions, ginger, garlic, shallots, cloves and cinnamon are used, there is only a small amount of chilli (or chili powder) used in its preparation.
As a pakki type of biryani, the Thalassery biryani uses a small-grained thin (not round) fragrant variety of rice known as khyma or jeerakasala. The dum method of preparation is applied to avoid scorched rice.
In Kerala, another variety called beef biryani is well known.

Travancore biriyani
Travancore biriyani is a  dish from Trivandrum. Characterized by its use of long-grained basmati rice, the biryani is lightly spiced with whole spices such as cloves, cinnamon, and bay leaves, and enriched with ghee or coconut oil. Typically prepared with mutton, chicken, or beef, it is garnished with fried cashew nuts, raisins, fresh coriander, and mint leaves, and often includes a boiled egg at the center. It is served with accompaniments like raita, coconut chutney, lime pickle, and pappadam.

Outside the Indian subcontinent
Burma
In Myanmar (Burma), biryani is known in Burmese as danpauk or danbauk (ဒံပေါက်), derived from the Persian term dum pukht, which refers to a slow oven cooking technique. Danbauk is a mainstay at festive events such as Thingyan, weddings and donation feasts. Given danbauk's South Asian origins, danbauk restaurants and chains have traditionally been owned by Muslims, but in recent decades Buddhist entrepreneurs have entered the market.
Featured ingredients include: cashew nuts, yogurt, raisins and peas, chicken, cloves, cinnamon, saffron and bay leaf cooked in long-grain rice. In danbauk, chicken specially seasoned with a danbauk masala spice mix, is cooked with the rice. Danbauk is typically eaten with a number of side dishes, including a fresh salad of sliced onions, julienned cabbage, sliced cucumbers, fermented limes and lemons, fried dried chilies, and soup. In recent decades, danbauk restaurants have innovated variations, including "ambrosia" biryani (နတ်သုဓာထမင်း), which features dried fruits and buttered rice.

West Asia
In Iraq and in the states of the Persian Gulf, biryani (برياني: "biryani") is usually saffron-based with chicken usually being the meat or poultry of choice. It is popular throughout Iraq, especially in the Kurdistan Region.  Most variations also include vermicelli, fried onions, fried potato cubes, almonds, and raisins spread liberally over the rice. Sometimes, a sour/spicy tomato sauce is served on the side (maraq).
In Iran, during the Safavid dynasty (1501–1736), a dish called Beriyan Polo (Nastaliq script: بریان پلو) was made with lamb or chicken, marinated overnight—with yogurt, herbs, spices, dried fruits like raisins, prunes or pomegranate seeds—and later cooked in a tannour oven, then served with steamed rice.

Afghan biryani
A different dish called biryan is popular in Afghanistan. Biryan traces its origins to the same source as biryani, when most of Afghanistan was part of Kabul and Qandahar Subahs and as today sold in Afghanistan as well as in Bhopal, India. Biryan is prepared by cooking gosht and rice together, but without the additional gravy (yakhni) and other condiments that are used in biryani. The Delhi-based historian Sohail Hashmi refers to the biryan as midway between pulao and biryani.  Afghan biryani tends to use much dry fruit such as raisins and lesser amounts of meat, often cut into tiny pieces.

Indonesia
Nasi kebuli is an Indonesian spicy steamed rice dish cooked in goat meat broth, milk and ghee. Nasi kebuli is descended from kabuli palaw which is an Afghan rice dish, similar to biryani served in the Indian subcontinent.
Although Indonesia has authentic nasi kebuli, Indonesia also inherited and has local-style of biryani which is known as nasi biryani or nasi briyani. Nasi biryani is popular among and often associated as Acehnese, Arab Indonesian, Indian Indonesian and Malay cuisine.

Malaysia and Singapore
The Malaysian and Singaporean variety of biryani is called nasi briyani or nasi biryani. Although authentic styles of biryani from South India are popular, nasi briyani remains the most popular. The key differences between nasi briyani and Indian biryanis are that the meat in nasi briyani is cooked separately from the rice, and there is more curry, sauce, or gravy present in the nasi briyani than in Indian biryanis.
Nasi briyani dishes are very popular in Malaysia and Singapore. As an important part of Malaysian and Singaporean Indian cuisines, they are popularized through mamak stalls, hawker centres, and food courts as well as fine dining restaurants.
There are also eateries that sell pork as the main meat of the dish in Singapore.

Mauritius
Biryani dishes are very popular in Mauritius, especially at Muslim weddings and festivities. It is also widely available at street food places. Mauritian biryanis are often accompanied by an achaar (mango pickles), chilies and salads.

Philippines
Kapampangan cuisine of the Philippines (often in Pampanga) features a special dish called nasing biringyi (chicken saffron rice), resembling the Malaysian nasi briyani in both name and form, that is typically prepared only during special occasions such as weddings, family get-togethers or fiestas. It is not a staple of the Filipino diet as it is difficult to prepare compared to other usual dishes. A version that has merged with the Filipino version of the Spanish paella is known as bringhe.
South Asian and Middle Eastern-styled biryani underwent a surge in popularity in Manila in the 2020s, with both high-end restaurants and working-class eateries serving the dish, popularized by both Indian Filipinos and other South Asians as well as returning Overseas Filipino Workers from the Middle East. Some restaurants adjust recipes to suit Filipino palates.

South Africa
In the Cape Malay culture, a variation of biryani incorporates lentils as a key ingredient in the dish along with meat (usually beef, chicken, seafood or vegetables). The dish is made by cooking the rice and legumes and meat and gravy separately, then mixing it. Uncommonly, it is made using the dum-cooking method. The spices are similar to those used in the original Indian biryani.

East Africa
Variants of biryani exist in the cuisines of Somalia, Kenya, and Tanzania due to centuries of trade between the East African coast and South Asia for centuries, and the more recent migration of Indians to the latter two countries more recently during the British colonial era.
Zanzibar has its own form of biryani characterized by the mixture of East African and Indian spices, as well as influences from Arab cuisine. The meat used is most commonly chicken. This variant is similar to the forms of biryani served in Kenya.
In Somalia, the descendant of biryani is bariis iskukaris. It is served with chicken, goat, beef, lamb, or camel meat, and spiced with the Somali spice mixture xawaash and other spices. A unique characteristic of bariis and other Somali dishes is the addition of banana on the side to be mixed with the dish.

Thailand
Biryani in Thailand is commonly known as khao mhok (Thai: ข้าวหมก). It is commonly paired with chicken, beef or fish and topped with fried garlic. The dish is common in Thai cuisine and is often served with a green sour sauce.

See also

Bannu Pulao
Fried rice
Kabuli Pulao
Jollof rice
Tehari
Paella
List of rice dishes


== References ==