Fourth Wing is a new adult fantasy romance novel written by the American author Rebecca Yarros. It is the first book in the Empyrean series, following the journey of Violet Sorrengail, who is forced by her mother, General Sorrengail, to join the Basgiath War College and become a dragon rider in the kingdom of Navarre. Even though she has been trained her entire life to enter the Scribe Quadrant, Violet must endure deadly quests and competitions that push her to her limits while trying to avoid being killed by one of the most powerful riders in the quadrant, Xaden Riorson.
The book was published in the United States on May 2, 2023, by Red Tower Book, an imprint of Entangled Publishing. Its viral success within TikTok’s reader community, BookTok, significantly contributed to its No. 1 ranking on The New York Times bestseller list. It won The International Book of the Year 2024 at the annual TikTok Book Awards. The book sold over 2.7 million copies in its first week and has been translated into approximately 30 languages. 
Yarros has mentioned in interviews that the idea for Fourth Wing emerged when her publisher announced that they were going to start a romantic fantasy line, prompting her to submit five proposals. After several reviews, her publisher selected the third idea, which explored the Empyrean world.  The inspiration for the story stems from her fascination with dragons, her military experience with her husband, and her personal struggles.  Violet’s physical fragility, as described in the book, was influenced by Yarros’s own experience living with Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, a genetic disorder affecting both her and her children. Yarros has expressed a desire to represent people with chronic illnesses, showcasing that they can also be heroic.

Plot summary
20-year old Violet Sorrengail is the youngest daughter of General Lilith Sorrengail, who leads the Basgiath War College in Navarre. Students can choose to join one of four military branches: Infantry, Healer, Scribe, or Rider. Riders bond to a dragon which allows them to develop a magical power known as a signet. The kingdom is protected by wards that use dragon magic.
Despite having trained most of her life to be a scribe like her late father, and suffering from chronic pain and weak joints, Violet is ordered by her mother to join the Riders Quadrant, seemingly for the sake of her own reputation. Violet’s older sister, Mira, a dragon rider graduate, helps her prepare for conscription day by giving her a journal with survival tips from their deceased brother Brennan, a dragon rider who died in a rebellion, and an unbreakable corset made of dragon scales from her own dragon Teine. Mira also warns Violet to stay away from children of rebels, who are branded with relics and forced to enter the Rider Quadrant as punishment for their parents rebellion. As general Sorrengail was responsible for their execution, they may seek revenge on her family.
As she prepares to cross the parapet, which is necessary for new cadets, Violet becomes friends with fellow cadet Rhiannon Matthias. Violet crosses the parapet and narrowly avoids being thrown to her death by the violent cadet Jack Barlowe, who vows to kill her personally. She meets Xaden Riorson, a third-year student with a rebellion relic whose father was executed by Violet's mother. In Basgiath, she reunites with her childhood friend and longtime crush Dain Aetos, second-year cadet who worries for her safety and suggests she move to the Scribe Quadrant, but she refuses, knowing her mother will stop her. Violet joins Rhiannon in Fourth Wing under Xaden's command, with Dain as their squad leader, and learns Dain's signet allows him to view memories of those he touches, which she agrees to keep secret.
Cadet training starts, and Violet, despite being good in academics and trained as a scribe, struggles with sparring courses due to her frailty. She is targeted by marked ones who blame her for her mother’s actions. To improve her combat skills, Violet offers to teach Rhiannon about history in exchange for training. She also makes friends with Ridoc and Sawyer, teammates in her squad. Using Brennan's journal, she learns her sparring partners' names in advance and begins to poison them before their match to give her the upper hand. One night, she overhears marked ones having a secret meeting and is caught by Xaden, who asks her to stay quiet for a favor in the future. In a sparring match later, Xaden shows her how to improve her fighting skills.
Violet and her squad meet the dragons and see a rare golden feathertail, a species known for avoiding human connections. During threshing, Violet learns that Jack wants to kill the golden dragon, thinking it is weak. She intervenes, but Jack and his friends attack her. Xaden and his dragon, Sgaeyl, watch the fight. Violet defeats her attackers, and then a large black dragon named Tairn appears, kills the remaining students, bonds with Violet, and takes her back to school. Violet becomes the first rider with two dragons, also connecting with the golden dragon, Andarna. She learns Tairn's previous rider died trying to revive someone during a revolt. Dain kisses Violet, but finds that she no longer has feelings for him.
Violet struggles to maintain balance on Tairn during flying training, feeling frustrated with Dain’s protective nature, which she interprets as believing she is weak. She also has yet to manifest a signet, which could kill her if not done soon. One night, Tairn wakes her when six unbonded cadets attempt to kill her. Andarna saves her by using her magic to briefly freeze time around Violet. Xaden rescues her and kills the cadets, and when Violet reveals a senior cadet let the attackers in, Xaden confronts them and has them executed in front of everyone for breaching the Codex.
After the attack, Xaden arranges for Liam, his foster brother and a marked first year cadet, to protect Violet. During a meeting with their dragons, Violet learns she can communicate with Sgaeyl because of her bond with Tairn and that Andarna is a young dragon, which requires her abilities to remain secret. After weeks of waiting, Violet finally gains power from Tairn. She kisses Xaden due to Tairn’s feelings for Sgaeyl, which influences their feelings as well. During a sparring session, Jack tries to kill her, and she escapes by forcing orange juice into his mouth, which triggers an allergic reaction.
The annual Squad Battle arrives, cadets compete to take valuable items from others. Violet's team captures General Sorrengail's map of military outposts, allowing them to monitor the front lines. While flying to a military base called Montserrat, Violet and Xaden find they can communicate telepathically through their dragons. They face an attack from gryphon fliers from Poromiel. Later, during a capture the flag game, Violet uses her dragon Andarna to freeze time, saving Liam from an attack by Jack, and manifests the rare and powerful signet to wield lightning, which she uses to cause a landslide which seemingly kills Jack. That night, Violet and Xaden become intimate, but she tells him she needs emotional connection to continue their physical relationship. She starts asking him personal questions, including why he and his cousin Bodhi were out after curfew. Xaden shares they were at a nearby military base but doesn’t explain further.
Reunification Day is celebrated to mark the victory over rebels. Violet seeks out Xaden, who is grieving for his father, and they express their mutual attraction, culminating in intimacy. Their moment is interrupted by news of the final round of War Games. They lead a group of marked ones at an outpost outside the wards in Athebyne, where they encounter gryphon fliers. Violet learns that Xaden has been secretly supplying weapons to them. Although hurt by this betrayal, Xaden reveals that Poromiel is under attack by venins, evil creatures thought to be mythical, and that the leaders of Navarre are hiding this truth. They arrived at the outpost but find it deserted. A nearby village is attacked by venin and wyvern and they realise they've been lead into a trap by Colonel Aetos, who found out about their trips to Athebyne through Dain using his signet on Violet without her knowing.
Despite the danger, Violet and her crew decide to help the gryphon fliers against the venin attack. Liam's dragon is killed, and he dies in Violet's arms, since riders will die if their bonded dragons do. Using her lightning powers, Violet defeats the last venin and briefly stops time with energy from Andarna, but she becomes seriously injured. Xaden and the survivors seek safety in Aretia, an abandoned city. After three days, Violet wakes up, and Xaden vows to earn her trust, though she remains cautious. She is shocked to find her brother Brennan alive and part of the revolution, having used his mending signet to heal Violet's injuries.

Characters
Main characters
Violet Sorrengail: The protagonist and primary point-of-view character. Smaller and physically weaker than the other riders, she only joins the Riders Quadrant at the demand of her mother, General Lilith Sorrengail. She is assigned to Fourth Wing. In an unprecedented turn of events, she bonds to two dragons, Tairneanach, or "Tairn", a black, morningstartail, behemoth of a dragon, and Andarnaurram, or "Andarna", a golden, feathertail dragon.
Xaden Riorson: A marked one, and wing leader of Fourth Wing who, through his bond with his dragon Sgaeyl, has the ability to wield shadows. He is the son of Fen Riorson, a rebellion leader who killed Violet's brother and was later marked by Violet's mother. Because of this, Xaden and Violet are incredibly hostile towards one another. Xaden is described as an extremely attractive person and is a love interest for Violet. Bonded to Sgaeyl, a navy-blue, daggertail dragon.
Dain Aetos: Violet's childhood best friend and son of Colonel Aetos. A second-year Rider, he is a squad leader in the Fourth Wing. Through his bond with his dragon Cath, he can read memories upon touching another person. He is a love interest for Violet. Bonded to Cath, a red swordtail; signet: retrocognition.
Rhiannon Matthias: A first-year member of the Riders Quadrant who is assigned to Fourth Wing. She becomes Violet's best friend. Bonded to Feirge, a green, daggertail; signet: retrieval.
Sawyer Henrick: A repeated first year, he and Rhiannon agree to help Violet with hand-to-hand combat if Violet tutors them in history. He becomes a good friend of Violet, Rhiannon, and Ridoc. Bonded to Sliseag, a red, swordtail dragon; signet: metallurgy.
Ridoc Gamlyn: A first-year member of the Riders Quadrant who is assigned to Fourth Wing. He is very humorous and becomes a good friend of Violet, Rhiannon, and Sawyer. Bonded to Aotrom, a brown swordtail; signet: ice-wielding.
Liam Mairi: A first-year Rider who grew up with Xaden after their parents were killed for leading the rebellion. Bonded to Deigh, a red daggertail; signet: farsight.

Other Basgiath War College students
Jack Barlowe: A violent first-year Rider who is assigned to First Wing and makes it his mission to kill Violet.
Jesinia Neilwart: a first-year in the Scribe Quadrant and Violet's friend.
Oren Seifert: a jealous first-year Rider who is assigned to First Wing and like Jack makes it his mission to kill Violet.
Amber Mavis: a wing leader and a close friend of Dain.

Notable Navarre military officials
Lilith Sorrengail: She is the Commanding General of Basgiath War College. Her signet is Storm Wielding, and she is bound to the Brown Dragon Aimsir. Lilith is known as a ruthless, stern, and powerful rider, which makes her respected and feared by those within and outside the Kingdom of Navarre. Lilith is also Asher Sorrengail's wife and Violet Sorrengail's mother. In addition, Lilith plays an important role in the life of Xaden Riorson, as she is responsible for the death of Fen Riorson.  
Mira Sorrengail: Violet's older sister and a graduate of Basgiath War College. She strongly opposes her mother's decision to force Violet into the Riders Quadrant. Bonded with Teine, a green, clubtail dragon; signet: ward extension.
Augustine Melgren: General of all of Navarre's armies. His bonded black swordtail dragon, Codagh, gave rebellion relics to all of the rebels' children, or "the marked ones", offering some protection to them from Melgren's signet. Melgren is able to see the outcome of any battle, except when three or more marked ones are gathered.
Colonel Aetos: Dain's father. Dragon and signet are unknown.

Additional notable characters
Brennan Sorrengail: Violet's brother. Signet: mending. Bonded to an orange daggertail dragon named Marbh.
Asher Sorrengail: Violet's father
Fen Riorson: Xaden's father, Fen, was an infantryman and leader of the Tyrrish rebellion against the government of Navarre. Fen was a man of values who wanted Xaden to follow his footsteps. As a result of his actions against the government, as well as the death of Brennan Sorrengail, Fen Riorson was sentenced to death, with Lilith Sorrengail in charge of carrying out the execution.
Imogen Cardulo:  A second-year rider at Basgiath War College as a supportive friend to Xaden and a potential ally for Violet.
Garrick Tavis: Xaden's best friend since childhood, Garrick is characterized by his loyalty and steadfast nature.
Professor Carr: A knowledgeable instructor at Basgiath War College.

Reception
The book had a mostly positive critical reception. Publishers Weekly gave the book a starred review, praising its worldbuilding, characters, and "sexy dark academia aesthetic". Alana Joli Abbott, in a review for Paste, praised its use of familiar tropes and compared it favorably to fantasy series like Blood Trials by N.E. Davenport and A Court of Thorns and Roses by Sarah J. Maas. The book was one of the most borrowed titles in American public libraries during 2023 and 2024.
Fourth Wing became a viral phenomenon on BookTok, where the hashtags "#FourthWing" and "#RebeccaYarros" have more than a billion views combined. Its popularity led it to reach No. 1 on Amazon's bestseller list as well as the No. 1 spot on The New York Times Bestseller list, where it stayed for 18 weeks. It has been credited as helping to popularize the "romantasy" genre, which blends elements of romance and fantasy genres.
Kimberly Terasaki of The Mary Sue wrote about a phenomenon within the fandom of portraying Xaden, a primary love interest of the protagonist, as white in fan art despite the fact that he is described as dark-skinned in the book. Yarros also commented on the phenomenon and asserted that the character is not intended to be white.
There is a review available by Tamara Saarinen from the School Library Journal, who approached Fourth Wing from the perspective of a school library. She noted that the use of modern profanity and sexual scenes make this book more appropriate for older teen audiences. That said, she did give an overall positive verdict for school libraries, claiming it would attract “romantasy” fans.
The sequel, Iron Flame, was released on November 7, 2023. The third book, Onyx Storm, was released on January 21, 2025.

Adaptations
In October 2023, Variety reported that a television adaptation of the series was in the works at Amazon MGM Studios. It was also revealed that Amazon and Outlier Society had acquired rights to all books in the series, with Rebecca Yarros and Liz Pelletier announced as executive producers of the series. In July 2024, Moira Walley-Beckett was announced to be the showrunner, but would later leave. Jac Schaeffer was in talks to replace her before Meredith Averill was announced to be the new showrunner.
In March 2025, Yarros announced graphic-novel adaptations are in the works for all three of books of The Empyrean series (Fourth Wing, Iron Flame, and Onyx Storm). Yarros has stated she will be adapting the text herself along with a team of comic creators. A total of six graphic-novels are planned to span all three books. This project is in partnership with Ten Speed Graphic, Piatkus, and Entangled Publishing. Release dates have not been announced.
A series of dramatised audiobooks was produced by American audiobook company GraphicAudio and released in 2023.

References
External links
Fourth Wing title listing at the Internet Speculative Fiction Database