Alberto Ginés López (born 23 October 2002) is a Spanish professional rock climber, specializing in competition lead climbing and competition bouldering. He won gold at the first Olympic sport climbing event at the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo in August 2021. He placed second in the 2019 Lead Climbing World Cup and won a silver medal at the 2019 Lead Climbing European Championship.

Biography
Ginés started climbing with his parents when he was very young. In 2013, Ginés, who was 10 years old at the time, met professional climbing coach David Macià in Rodellar, after his father introduced the child to him. Macià was surprised by the attitude with which Ginés climbed the sport climbing route, El Delfín 7c+ (5.13a), and became his coach.
In 2016, after the announcement that competition climbing would become an Olympic sport at 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo, he moved from Cáceres to Barcelona to train, with the goal of qualifying for the international event.
In August 2017, Ginés took a silver medal at the Lead Climbing Youth World Championships, in the category Youth B. A month later, he won the Lead Climbing European Youth Championship in the same category. In May 2018, Ginés won the Lead Climbing European Youth Championship, in the category Youth A. In August 2019, he took bronze medals at the Lead Climbing and Combined Climbing Youth World Championships, in the category Youth A. A month later, Ginés also won a bronze at the Lead Climbing European Youth Championships, in the same category.
On 6 October 2019, Ginés won a silver medal at the Lead Climbing European Championships. Later that month, he finished second in the Lead Climbing World Cup, winning medals in two of its six events: a bronze in Kranj and a silver in the last event, held in Inzai. In November, Ginés qualified to compete at the 2020 Summer Olympics in Tokyo. He won gold in the men's combined event at the 2020 Summer Olympics.

Rankings
Climbing World Cup
World Championships
Climbing European Championships
Number of medals in the Climbing European Youth Cup
Lead
Bouldering
Number of medals in the Climbing World Cup
Lead
See also
History of rock climbing

Notes
References
External links
Alberto Ginés López at the International Federation of Sport Climbing (archive)
Alberto Ginés at Olympedia 
Alberto Gines Lopez at Olympics.com 
Alberto Gines Lopez at the Paris 2024 Summer Olympics
Alberto Ginés López (and here) at the Comité Olímpico Español (in Spanish) (archived)
Alberto Ginés López at the Comité Olímpico Español (new page) (in Spanish)