Best Actor in a Supporting Role is a British Academy Film Award presented annually by the British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA) to recognise an actor who has delivered an outstanding supporting performance in a film.
The British Academy of Film and Television Arts (BAFTA), is a British organisation that hosts annual awards shows for film, television, children's film and television, and interactive media. Since 1968, selected actors have been awarded with the BAFTA Award for Best Actor in a Supporting Role at an annual ceremony.
In the following lists, the titles and names in bold with a gold background are the winners and recipients respectively; those not in bold are the nominees. The years given are those in which the films under consideration were released, not the year of the ceremony, which always takes place the following year.

History
The Best Supporting Actor award has been presented a total of 54 times to 48 different actors. No award was given out in this category in 1980, when no actors, male or female, were nominated for supporting roles. In addition, the award was replaced with a gender-neutral category for Best Supporting Artist, allotted for the year 1981 only, with all four nominees that year being male. The first winner was Ian Holm for his role in The Bofors Gun. The most recent winner is Kieran Culkin for his role in A Real Pain. The record for most wins is three, held by Denholm Elliott, who won three consecutive times, while five other actors have won twice. Elliott also holds the record for most nominations, with seven.

Winners and nominees
1960s
1970s
1980s
1990s
2000s
2010s
2020s
Multiple wins and nominations
Multiple nominations
Multiple wins
3 wins
Denholm Elliott (3 consecutive)
2 wins
Edward Fox
Ian Holm
Ray McAnally
Geoffrey Rush
Christoph Waltz

See also
Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor
Critics' Choice Movie Award for Best Supporting Actor
Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture
Independent Spirit Award for Best Supporting Performance
Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Supporting Role

Notes
References
External links
BAFTA Awards Database Archived 2008-12-24 at the Wayback Machine