The Bachelor: On the Wings of Love is the fourteenth season of ABC reality television series The Bachelor. The season premiere aired on January 4, 2010. The show features 31-year-old Jake Pavelka, a pilot from Dallas, Texas, courting 25 women.
Pavelka finished in seventh place on season 5 of The Bachelorette featuring Jillian Harris. It is the first season of The Bachelor to be broadcast in high definition. The season concluded on March 1, 2010, with Pavelka choosing to propose to 23-year-old marketing rep Vienna Girardi. The couple ended their engagement in June 2010.

Contestants
Biographical information according to ABC official series site, plus footnoted additions

Future appearances
Dancing with the Stars
Jake Pavelka competed in the tenth season of Dancing with the Stars. He partnered with Chelsie Hightower and finished in 7th place.

The Bachelorette
Ali Fedotowsky was chosen as the bachelorette for the sixth season of The Bachelorette.

Bachelor Pad
Runner-up Tenley Molzahn, along with contestants Gia Allemand, Ashley Elmore, Elizabeth Kitt, Michelle Kujawa and Jessie Sulidis, returned for the inaugural season of Bachelor Pad. Michelle was eliminated in week 1, Jessie in week 2, Gia in week 3, and Ashley in week 5.  Elizabeth and her partner, Jesse Kovacs, were eliminated at the beginning of week 6, finishing in 3rd place.  Tenley and her partner, Kiptyn Locke, were eliminated at the end of week 6, finishing as the runners-up.
Jake, Gia, Vienna Girardi, and Ella Nolan, returned for the second season of Bachelor Pad. Gia quit in week 2, and Jake was eliminated in week 3.  Ella and her partner, Kirk DeWindt, were eliminated at the beginning of week 6, finishing in 4th place. Vienna and her partner, Kasey Kahl, were eliminated at the end of week 6, finishing in 3rd place.

Bachelor in Paradise
Season 1
Michelle returned for the inaugural season of Bachelor in Paradise. She quit in week 1. 
Season 2
Tenley returned for the second season of Paradise. She broke up with Joshua Albers in week 6.

Other appearances
Outside of the Bachelor Nation franchise, Tenley and Michelle appeared as contestants in the Bachelors vs. Bachelorettes special on the season 7 of Wipeout.

Call-out order
The contestant received the first impression rose
  The contestant received a rose during the date
  The contestant was eliminated
  The contestant was eliminated during the date
  The contestant quit the competition
  The contestant received a rose during the date but disqualified from the competition
  The contestant moved on to the next week by default
  The previously eliminated contestant asked for a chance to return the competition but denied
  The contestant won the competition

Episodes
Post-show
After the Final Rose
This is the special episode that airs after every finale. In season 14's segment, Jake told Chris Harrison about Bachelor Pad, Ali was chosen as the next bachelorette in the sixth season of The Bachelorette. Jake and Vienna were seen in a public appearance as a couple. Jeffrey Osborne sang "On the Wings of Love" at the closing of the show.
In June 2010,  several months after their engagement, it was announced that Jake and Vienna Girardi had split.

Deaths
Gia Allemand
On August 14, 2013, third-place contestant Gia Allemand died after a reported suicide attempt. Several contestants and Pavelka expressed their condolences via Twitter, with Pavelka saying, "I am in complete shock and devastated to hear the news about Gia. She was one of the sweetest people I have ever known. And a very dear friend. My heart goes out to her family during this very difficult time. We have lost an angel today. I miss you Gia...".

Alexa McAllister
On 16 February 2016, Alexa (Lex) McAllister died after an apparent suicide attempt in Columbus, Ohio, as reported by TMZ. Per E! News, the local police said that on 13 February, they'd received a call in which it was claimed that McAllister had overdosed on prescription drugs. While McAllister was in a stable condition on her way to Grant Medical Center, E! News got access to a police report, which stated that she had taken "a lot" of pills. Her family took her off life support after her health began to deteriorate. McAllister was 31. Pavelka tweeted his condolences on Twitter, "I'm so sad to hear about Alexa. Such a beautiful girl. My heart breaks for her family. Covering them in prayer during this rough time".

Jake Pavelka
Jake Pavelka grew up in Denton, Texas, and attended University of North Texas and Embry-Riddle Aeronautical University. In his free time, he takes dancing lessons, woodworking, and has fun flying acrobatic planes and he is also a former child actor. Pavelka is an airline pilot, and took his first flying lessons at 12 years old. He also became a certified flight instructor when he was 23 years old.
Pavelka became a member of an ABC reality show for the third time when he appeared as a celebrity contestant on the tenth season of Dancing with the Stars. Partnered with Chelsie Hightower, he was the fifth competitor eliminated on April 27, 2010.

Notes
References
External links
Official website