The 52nd Annual Tony Awards ceremony was held on June 7, 1998, at Radio City Music Hall and was broadcast by CBS television. A documentaries segment was telecast on PBS television. The ceremony was hosted by Rosie O'Donnell, who hosted a total of three times (1997, 1998, and 2000).
This ceremony is notable for its Best Direction of a Play and Best Direction of a Musical winners both being female, the first time a female has won either award. The writer of the Best Play winner was also female, the second female winner of the award.
Ragtime had 13 nominations, the most of the night, and  Ragtime, The Beauty Queen of Leenane and Cabaret each won four Tonys.

Eligibility
Shows that opened on Broadway during the 1997–1998 season before April 30, 1998 are eligible.

The ceremony
The opening number was "Broadway Divas", with Rosie O'Donnell and the Chicago dancers introducing: Patti LuPone ("Don't Cry for Me Argentina" from Evita); Jennifer Holliday ("And I Am Telling You I'm Not Going" from Dreamgirls); and Betty Buckley ("Memory" from Cats).
Musicals represented:

Ragtime ("Ragtime" – Marin Mazzie, Audra McDonald and Company)
The Sound of Music ("Wedding"/"Do-Re-Mi"/"The Sound of Music" Finale – Rebecca Luker and Company)
1776 ("Sit Down, John" – Richard Poe and Company)
The Lion King ("Circle of Life" – Tsidii Le Loka and Company)
Cabaret ("Willkommen" – Alan Cumming and Company)
Side Show ("I Will Never Leave You" – Alice Ripley and Emily Skinner)
The Scarlet Pimpernel ("Into the Fire" – Douglas Sills and Company)

Winners and nominees
Winners are in bold

Special awards
Regional Theater Tony Award
Denver Center Theatre Company
Lifetime Achievement in the Theatre
Ben Edwards
Edward E. Colton
Tony Honor Winner
The International Theatre Institute of the United States

Multiple nominations and awards
See also
Drama Desk Awards
1998 Laurence Olivier Awards – equivalent awards for West End theatre productions
Obie Award
New York Drama Critics' Circle
Theatre World Award
Lucille Lortel Awards

References
"Year by Year – 1998". TonyAwards.com. Archived from the original on August 13, 2017. Retrieved August 13, 2017.

External links
Tony Awards Official website