One Percent for the Planet is an international organization whose members contribute at least one percent of their annual revenue to environmental causes to protect the environment. Founded by Yvon Chouinard, founder of Patagonia, and Craig Mathews, owner of Blue Ribbon Flies in 2002, the organization encourages "more businesses to donate 1% of sales to environmental groups".
Since its creation, the organization has been joined by countries around the world, with a great number of partners in France, Great Britain, Australia, and Japan. France is the only country to have an independent entity.

Impact
Since its founding, the 1% for the Planet movement has directed substantial funding toward global environmental solutions. The organization reports that more than $728 million has been donated to approved environmental non-profits worldwide. 
This funding is attributed to the following types of impact :

Policy and Advocacy: Supporting non-profits that have successfully mobilized to modify or prevent environmental legislation.
Conservation: Protection of threatened ecosystems and species.
Climate Resilience: Efforts to help local communities strengthen their resilience in the face of climate change and environmental disruptions.
The movement emphasizes that the non-profit partners it supports are experts in ecological issues and carry out targeted actions directly addressing the causes of environmental imbalances.

Members
Surfclass.com became the first member in Jan 2002. Notable members of the organization include

Caudalie, a French cosmetics brand.
Cotopaxi, an outdoor apparel company.
Flickr, a photo-sharing service.
KeepCup, an Australian reusable cup brand.
Klean Kanteen, a producer of reusable stainless steel water bottles.
The Sunglass Fix, an Australian replacement lenses company.
New Belgium Brewing Company, a craft brewery.
OXO, a manufacturer of kitchen utensils and housewares.
Verdical Group, a sustainability consulting firm.
Since 1985, Patagonia pledged 1% of sales to the preservation of restoration of the natural environment.

References
External links
Official website