The following is a list of awards and nominations received by Christopher Plummer.
Christopher Plummer was a Canadian actor known for his diverse roles on stage and screen. Plummer is one of the few actors to have received the Triple Crown of Acting, having won the Academy Award, Emmy Award and Tony Award. Other awards Plummer has received include a British Academy Film Award, a Golden Globe Award, and a Screen Actors Guild Award. Plummer was just a Grammy Award away from achieving the EGOT status (Emmy, Grammy, Oscar, and Tony), which is considered the "grand slam" of American show business.
Plummer won the Academy Award for Best Supporting Actor at the age of 82 for playing an elderly gay man in Mike Mills' comedy drama Beginners (2010), becoming the oldest person to win an acting award (a distinction he held until being supplanted by 83-year-old Anthony Hopkins in 2021). He was Oscar-nominated for playing Leo Tolstoy in the drama The Last Station (2009) and J. Paul Getty in the crime thriller All the Money in the World (2017), the later making him the oldest person to be nominated in an acting category at the age of 88.
For his work on the Broadway stage he won two Tony Awards, his first for Best Actor in a Musical for playing Cyrano de Bergerac in the musical Cyrano (1974) and Best Actor in a Play for playing John Barrymore in the play Barrymore (1997). He was Tony-nominated for his performances in the plays J.B. (1959), Othello (1982), No Man's Land (1994), King Lear (2004), and Inherit the Wind (2007).
For his work on television he has also received seven Primetime Emmy Award nominations winning twice for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Miniseries or Movie for Arthur Hailey's the Moneychangers (1977) and Outstanding Voice-Over Performance for Madeline in 1994. He has also received a Grammy Award for Best Children's Album nomination for Tchaikovsky's The Nutcracker in 1986.

Major associations
Academy Awards
BAFTA Awards
Emmy Awards
Golden Globe Awards
Grammy Awards
Screen Actors Guild Awards
Tony Awards
Critics associations
Miscellaneous awards
Other theatre awards
Honorary awards
Canadian Honours
Canadian Honours System

See also
Christopher Plummer on screen and stage

Notes


== References ==