Markazi province (Persian: استان مرکزی) is one of the 31 provinces of Iran. Its capital is the city of Arak. The present borders of the province date to 1977, when the province was split into the current Markazi and Tehran provinces, with portions being annexed by Isfahan, Semnan, and Zanjan Provinces. In 2014, the province was placed in Region 4.

History
Markazi province was part of the Median Empire in the first millennium BC, which included all of the central and western parts of modern-day Iran. The region is considered to be one of the ancient settlements on the Iranian plateau. Numerous remaining ruins testify to the antiquity of this area.
In the early centuries of Islam, the name of the area was changed to Jibal or Kuhestan. By the early 10th century, Khorheh had become a famous city of Jibal province, followed by Tafresh and Khomein.
In recent times, the expansion of the north–south railroad (commonly known as the Persian Corridor) and the establishment of major industries have helped boost development in the area.

Demographics
Ethnicity
Persians make up the majority of the province, but there are significant minorities of Azerbaijanis, Kurds, Lurs, etc.

Population
At the time of the 2006 National Census, the province's population was 1,326,826 in 364,155 households. The following census in 2011 counted 1,413,959 people in 426,613 households. The 2016 census measured the population of the province as 1,429,475 in 455,866 households.

Administrative divisions
The population history and structural changes of Markazi province's administrative divisions over three consecutive censuses are shown in the following table.

Cities
According to the 2016 census, 1,099,764 people (over 76% of the population of Markazi province) live in the following cities:

Colleges and universities
Arak University of Medical Sciences
Arak University of Technology
University of Arak
Tafresh University
Islamic Azad University of Khomein
Islamic Azad University of Arak
Islamic Azad University of Saveh
Islamic Azad University of Farahan
Islamic Azad University of Ashtian
Islamic Azad University of Tafresh
Farhangian University of Arak
Energy University (Saveh)

Notable people
Many figures in Iranian history trace their origins to this province. namely: Mirza Abu'l-Qasem Qa'em-Maqam, Abbas Eqbal Ashtiani, Mirza Taqi Khan Amir Kabir, Mirza Bozorg Qa'em-Maqam, Mahmoud Hessabi, Ayatollah Khomeini, Ayatollah Araki, and many others.

Gallery
See also
Media related to Markazi Province at Wikimedia Commons

Notes
References
External links
Markazi Government General Archived 7 August 2011 at the Wayback Machine
Foreign Commercial Centre of Markazi Province
Cultural Heritage Organization of Markazi province
Iran Chamber of Commerce, Industries & Mines