The Miami Book Fair is an annual street fair and literary festival organized by Miami Dade College.

History
Miami Book Fair International, originally known as "Books by the Bay," was founded in 1984 by Miami Dade College President Eduardo J. Padrón, Books & Books owner Mitchell Kaplan, Craig Pollock of BookWorks, and other local bookstore owners in cooperation with the Miami-Dade Public Library System. The two primary organizers of the inaugural 1984 Book Fair from the Miami-Dade Public Library System were Head of Community Relations Margarita Cano and Wolfsonian campus librarian Juanita Johnson.

Community Partners and Sponsors
Florida Center for the Literary Arts (FCLA)
The Florida Center for the Literary Arts (FCLA) is affiliated with the Miami Book Fair International. A permanent endowment for the FCLA was established with a grant from the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation. Full programming began in January 2002.
As a department of Miami Dade College, FCLA generates programs to support authors and writing, journalism, play and screen writing, reading and literacy, as well as the Miami Book Fair International. Outreach consists of reading campaigns and book discussions, writing workshops, author presentations, panel discussions, and master classes. The Center collaborates with Florida-based cultural institutions and other partners to advance literary initiatives.

Events
Festival of Authors
Typically more than 300 authors from around the world participate in the Fair's international Festival of Authors. Writers come from across the United States and other countries including Argentina, Bosnia, Brazil, Canada, China, Cuba, Dominican Republic, England, France, Finland, Guatemala, Haiti, Hong Kong, Israel, Ireland, Jamaica, Mexico, Nicaragua, Philippines, Russia, South Africa, Spain, Taiwan, Trinidad, among others.

Evenings With...Series
The "Evenings With… series" features readings by writers every evening for six consecutive festival days. Past guest authors have included recipients of the Nobel Prize in Literature, Pulitzer Prize, National Book Award, Casa de las Americas Prize, Pushcart Prize, O'Henry Award, National Magazine Award, Commonwealth Prize, MacArthur Fellowship, and Edgar Award.

Street Fair
The three-day outdoor festival gathers hundreds of booksellers and exhibitors from major publishing houses, small presses, scholarly imprints, and foreign publishers. Sellers of used books, including signed first editions, original manuscripts, and other collectibles, also participate. Millions of books in multiple languages are available, along with book signings and musical entertainment, during the weekend Fair activity.

Comix Galaxy
Comic Galaxy is a Fair program offering information on graphic novels and the comics world. It celebrates their place in United States literary life and their increasing popularity and integration into mainstream literature, culture, and education. The School of Comics, a prominent part of Comic Galaxy, is a day-long program with six sessions for teachers, librarians, parents, and others interested in the format, and special training for established comic book creators.

Children's Alley
Children's Alley, designed for young readers, features storytelling, puppets, theatrical performances, educational games, and hands-on activities. Generation Genius, a program within Children's Alley, hosts thousands of school-aged children annually. Miami Book Fair International also offers workshops and presentations to local teachers, librarians, and educators as part of Generation Genius. Programs are provided in cooperation with Miami Art Museum, HistoryMiami, Miami Children's Museum, Miami Science Museum, Early Learning Coalition of Miami Dade/Monroe, and Florida Blue.

Ibero-American Authors
Ibero-American Authors is Miami Book Fair International's Spanish and Portuguese language author program. More than 50 authors from various Latin American countries are featured during the eight days of the Fair. Readings take place nightly during the week and throughout the weekend.

Twilight Tastings and the Kitchen
Miami Book Fair International also includes hors d'oeuvre, complimentary cocktails, and nightly entertainment before weeknight author presentations. The Kitchen combines cooking demonstrations and author readings by featured cookbook authors and chefs as they recreate recipes from their books.

LGBTQIA+ Topics
Authors writing on LGBTQIA+ topics are represented throughout the festival with titles in fiction, non-fiction, memoir, and erotica. Many featured authors are Lambda Award winners or finalists.

Miami Writer's Institute
Center for Literature and Theatre faculty, authors, and agents provide workshops related to fiction, nonfiction, poetry, and publishing. The center offers one and three-day workshops, with several taking place in Spanish.

Recent-Year Highlights
2014
In 2014, the Miami Book Fair International partnered with the National Book Foundation to offer programming focused on 2014 National Book Award nominees and winners. Some of the authors appearing at Miami Book Fair International 2014 included:

Robert Baer
Richard Blanco
John Cleese
Andy Cohen
Michael DeForge
Angela DiTerlizzi
Tony DiTerlizzi
Sheila E
Grace Ellis
Annabelle Gurwitch
James W. Hall
Ben Hatke
Kazu Kibuishi
Nicholas Kristof
Norman Lear
Brad Meltzer
Lauren Miller
Susan Minot
George O'Connor
Lauren Oliver
Ann Patchett
Ed Piskor
Valerie Plame
Questlove
Anne Rice
Tavis Smiley
Raina Telgemeier
John Waters
Cornel West
Eveline Pierre

2013
The 30th edition of the Fair celebrated the culture and literature of Spain. Authors appearing at Miami Book Fair International 2013 included: 

Jeff Abbott
Mitch Albom
Reza Aslan
Paul Auster
Holly Black
Stanley Crouch
Kwame Dawes
Delia Ephron
Ana Fuentes
Nikki Giovanni
Doris Kearns Goodwin
Dr. Carl Hart
John Heilemann
Anjelica Huston
Andrew Kaufman
Gordon Korman
Diane Ladd
Wally Lamb
Adam Mansbach
Chris Matthews
D.T. Max
Terry McMillan
Brad Meltzer
David N. Meyer
Jacquelyn Mitchard

2012
The featured country of 2012's Miami Book Fair International was Paraguay. Paraguayan culture was showcased through film, dance, and fine and folkloric arts.
Authors at Miami Book Fair International 2012 included:

Martin Amis
Nate Berkus
Justin Cronin
Aline Crumb
Andre Debus III
Junot Díaz
Emma Donoghue
Tim Dorsey
Carolina Garcia-Aguilera
Chris Hayes
Mark Helprin
Jamal Joseph
Daniel Kirk
Anne Lamott
Jessica Martinez
Diana McCaulay
Andrew McCarthy
Christopher Pike
Bill O'Reilly
Lemony Snicket
Jake Tapper
Jeffrey Toobin
Irvine Welsh
Sherri Winston
Tom Wolfe

2011
Miami Book Fair International 2011 included demonstrations of Chinese culture and art and discussions of social issues facing contemporary China. An international symposium on Chinese language, culture, and communication was also held.
Authors participating in Miami Book Fair International 2011 included: 

Dr. Arthur Agatston
Tom Angleberger
David Brooks
Dan Clowes
John Connolly
Bob Edwards
Jeffrey Eugenides
Cristina García
Dr. Paul George
Lev Grossman
Sandra Gutierrez
Ellen Hopkins
Jeff Kinney
Megan McDonald
Michael Moore
Elizabeth Nunez
Susan Orlean
Chuck Palahniuk
Christopher Paolini
Karen Russell
Esmeralda Santiago
Jon Scieszka
Touré
Calvin Trillin
Belle Yang

2010
The fair dedicated its international space to Mexico, in celebration of the bicentennial of the nation's independence and the centennial of its 1910 revolution. Events included author presentations and roundtables, Ballet performances, art and photography exhibitions, a movie series, and theater performances.
Authors participating in Miami Book Fair International 2010 included: 

Maha Akhtar
Kim Anthony
Dan Archer
Ann Beattie
Susanna Daniel
Edwidge Danticat
Kate DiCamillo
Tony DiTerlizzi
Dave Eggers
Jonathan Franzen
Willie Geist
James W. Hall
Vicki Hendricks
Sebastian Junger
Chip Kidd
Hari Kunzru
Meghan McCain
Ben Mezrich
Walter Mosley
Beatriz Rivera
Scott Turow
Lisa Unger
Judith Viorst
Scott Westerfeld
Simon Winchester

2009
Environmental issues were a focus of Miami Book Fair International 2009. The college used native plants on stages and entrances, which were later planted in the community. Bike Valet parking service was available, and recycling programs were promoted.
Authors appearing at Miami Book Fair International 2009 included:

Lidia Bastianich
Edna Buchanan
Meg Cabot
Susie Essman
Dan Goldman
Al Gore
Senator Bob Graham
Heather Graham
James Grippando
Dr. Sanjay Gupta
John Hodgman
Gwen Ifill
Sid Jacobson
Wally Lamb
Peter Lerangis
Jonathan Lethem
Tao Lin
Jeff Lindsay
Ralph Nader
Joyce Carol Oates
Iggy Pop
Sherman Alexie
Luis Alberto Urrea
Larry Wilmore

See also
Florida literature
Books in the United States

References
External links

Official website
The Center for Literature and Theatre @ Miami Dade College Tumblr Page
Florida Center for the Literary Arts at Miami Dade College YouTube Page
Miami Book Fair International History on C-SPAN 2 Book TV
Major Book Fairs in the US
New York Times Article A Book Fair That Grew, Propelling the Arts in Miami