Kataller Toyama (カターレ富山, Katāre Toyama) is a football club based in Toyama, Capital of Toyama Prefecture. The club currently play in J2 League  after promotion from J3 in 2024, Japanese second tier of professional football.

History
The idea of a merged club had been discussed by the Toyama Prefectural Football Association as early as 2005, but discussions had come to nothing at the time.
On 10 September 2007, YKK (owner of YKK AP SC) and Hokuriku Electric Power Company (owner of ALO's Hokuriku), agreed with merging their clubs to aim promotion to the J.League in response of eager request by the TPFA. According to Tulip TV, local broadcasting company, over twenty companies informally promised to invest in the new club. In the media briefing, the governor of Toyama Prefecture also participated.
TPFA has founded an organisation named "Civic Football Club Team of Toyama Prefecture (富山県民サッカークラブチーム)" with two major economic organisation and representatives of Hokuriku Electric Power Company and YKK. The Japan Football League confirmed that the merged club would compete in the JFL from the 2008 season.
They applied for J.League Associate Membership in January 2008, then their application was accepted at the board meeting of J.League on 19 February 2008. On 23 November 2008, they secured qualification for promotion to the J2 League and on 1 December 2008, promotion was made official by J.League.
In 2014, after a six-year stint at the J2, Kataller Toyama was relegated to the J3 ahead of the 2015 season after a J2 bottom-place finish.
On 7 December 2024, Kataller Toyama secure promotion to J2 League after draw 2-2 against Matsumoto Yamaga and ended 10 years in third tier.

Name and crest
The word "kataller" is a portmanteau of the phrase katare (勝たれ) which in Toyama dialect means "to win", and the French aller, "to go". The phrase is also intended to be a pun of Italian cantare, "to sing", and of native Japanese katare (語れ), "to talk" (written with a different kanji character).
The crest is shaped in the form of a tulip, the official Toyama Prefecture flower.

League & cup record
Key

Honours
Current squad
As of 12 September 2025.

Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.

Out on loan
Note: Flags indicate national team as defined under FIFA eligibility rules; some limited exceptions apply. Players may hold more than one non-FIFA nationality.

Club officials
Managerial history
Kit and colours
Colours
Kataller Toyama's main colour is blue.

Kit evolution
References
External links
Official site (in Japanese)